
## Variables and Environment variables

In bash variables can be defined from the command line and used later in the same shell session or from within a script.
All variables are always capitalized.

When a variable is available throughout the environment for use, not just one session or script, it is called as `environment variable` .

`env`
can be used to see all the environment variables defined (which varies along distributions)
```bash
sujith@sujith-Latitude-7490:~/Desktop$ env
SHELL=/bin/bash
SESSION_MANAGER=local/sujith-Latitude-7490:@/tmp/.ICE-unix/1537,unix/sujith-Latitude-7490:/tmp/.ICE-unix/1537
QT_ACCESSIBILITY=1
PWD=/home/sujith/Desktop
LOGNAME=sujith
HOME=/home/sujith
USERNAME=sujith
IM_CONFIG_PHASE=1
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
USER=sujith
GNOME_TERMINAL_SERVICE=:1.132
DISPLAY=:0
SHLVL=1
PATH=/home/sujith/.nvm/versions/node/v20.17.0/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:/snap/bin
GDMSESSION=ubuntu
DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus
NVM_BIN=/home/sujith/.nvm/versions/node/v20.17.0/bin
_=/usr/bin/env
OLDPWD=/home/sujith
```

These can be viewed through `echo string` also where `string` is output.
To output the value of a variable `$` should precede the variable name.
```bash
sujith@sujith-Latitude-7490:~/Desktop$ echo $USER; echo $SHELL; echo $PWD; echo $OLDPWD;
sujith
/bin/bash
/home/sujith/Desktop
/home/sujith
```


Some Bash Environment Variables
`DESKTOP_SESSION`  Name of desktop GUI `gnome`
`HISTAG` Size of history list `1000`
`LANG` The specified language and character encoding `en_US.UTF-8`
`MAIL` Location of user's main storage
`OLDPWD` Current working directory prior to this one which is `PWD`
`PATH` List of directories to search to find executable programs
`PS1` defines the user's prompt
`SHELL` User's default shell

`PATH` is an important `env` variable. In Linux commands are implemented as programs which are distributed in various directories. Most are found in `/user/bin  /user/sbin`
```
PATH=/home/sujith/.nvm/versions/node/v20.17.0/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:/snap/bin
```
Without Path variable we will have to specify the location of the command before calling any command.


___

To store a value into a variable, we can use an `assignment statement`.
`VAR=VALUE` with no space between the equal sign.
We may define new or or redefine an existing one. (if known what is being done)
```bash
$ FIRST=Sujith
$ LAST=kumar
$ echo $FIRST $LAST
Sujith Kumar
```

Using `' '` single quotes make the bash interpreter to use the items literally and not apply the `$` to retrieve the value from the variables.
```bash
$ FULL_NAME='$FIRST $LAST'
$ echo $FULL_NAME
$ $FIRST $LAST
```
If there is any blank space in the Value being assigned, then value has to be in `" "`
```bash
$ FULL_NAME="$FIRST $LAST"
$ echo $FULL_NAME
Sujith Kumar
```

> If a command like `pwd` is stored in a variable and called, bash will execute it.


the escape character `\` is used to tell the bash interpreter to treat whatever comes after `\` literally and not to interpret it. `\$$AMOUNT`, the first `$` is escaped.

`$$` has its own meaning which is getting the process ID of the running bash interpreter.


Other escape characters 
`\\`  outputs a `\`,  escaping the escape character
`\b` backspace
`\n` Newline
`\t` tab
`\!  \$  \&  \;  \'  \"`  escaping all the usual symbols used.


_____

## Aliases

alias is used to define an instruction in a shortened form.
Similar to defining a variable, this is also defined using an assignment of a name to a value, but in this case the value is a Linux command.
We an execute the command by by issuing the alias.

To define an alias, after the word `alias` type the assignment statement.
`alias name=command`  the name is the alias.
The name is not as restrictive as for variables, any character can be used.
for the value, if the command contains space, then `" "` has to be used. 
again ` ' '` will make the command to be taken literally, but not executed.

```bash
alias ..="cd .."
alias ~="cd ~"
alias lss=less
alias sl=ls
alias rm='rm -i'
```
`rm` is given in single quotes to input the interactive version.

We can view the pre defined alias by typing `alias` itself
```bash
alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
alias grep='grep --color=auto'
alias l='ls -CF'
alias la='ls -A'
alias ll='ls -alF'
alias ls='ls --color=auto'
alias alert='notify-send --urgency=low -i "$([ $? = 0 ] && echo terminal || echo error)" "$(history|tail -n1|sed -e '\''s/^\s*[0-9]\+\s*//;s/[;&|]\s*alert$//'\'')"'
```

Alias can be removed by using `unalias ll` to remove it


___


