
JavaScript automatically converts values between different types when necessary. This is commonly known as **type coercion**. It happens in a variety of scenarios, such as when performing mathematical operations or comparisons.

if JavaScript wants a string, it will convert whatever value you give it to a string. If
JavaScript wants a number, it will try to convert the value you give it to a number (or
to NaN if it cannot perform a meaningful conversion).
When JavaScript expects a boolean value, you may supply a value of any
type, and JavaScript will convert it as needed based on truthy or falsy.


#### Automatic Type Conversion:

1. **Comparison with Different Types**:
   JavaScript will convert values to the same type when doing comparisons, which can sometimes produce unexpected results.

```js
> '2' > 1   // 2 convered to number
true

> '01' == 1   // 01 converted to number  
true

> true == 1   // true is converted to 1
true

> false == 0   // false converted to 0
true

> 10 + 'Object'
'10Object'

> 'Object' + 10    // 10 converted to string
'Object10'

> '7' + '4'
'74'
> '7' * '4'    // both string to number
28

> let n = 1 - "x";
> n
NaN
> n + "object"
'NaNobject'
```

2. **Boolean Conversion**:
   When converting values to `Boolean`, JavaScript considers certain values as **falsy** (which become `false`) and others as **truthy** (which become `true`).

```
Falsy values :
0
"" (empty string)
null
undefined
NaN

Truthy values :
Non-zero-numbers, Non-empty strings,
Objects, arrays, functions, etc.
```

```js
> Boolean(1)
true

> Boolean(0)
false

> Boolean("0")
true

> Boolean("")
false

> Boolean("Hello")
true

> Boolean(null)
false

> Boolean('null')
true

> Boolean([])
true     // empty array is truthy
```

Object-to-primitive conversion is somewhat more complicated
The primitive-to-primitive conversions shown in the table are relatively straightforward.

Keep in mind that convertibility of one value to another does not imply equality of those two values.

The if statement converts undefined to false, but the == operator never
attempts to convert its operands to booleans.

Use strict checks `===  !==`to avoid implicit conversions of types.




---

