
A **string** is a sequence of text characters enclosed in either single quotes (`' '`), double quotes (`" "`), or backticks (`` ` ``). Strings are one of the most commonly used data types in JavaScript.

The empty string is the string of length 0. Java‐
Script does not have a special type that represents a single element of a string.

#### String Literals

```js
let str = "Hello";               // Double quotes
let str1 = 'Single quotes are ok too'; // Single quotes
```

### Template Literals

Template literals are enclosed by backticks (`` ` ``) and these template literals can include arbitrary JavaScript expressions inside `${}`. The final value of a string literal in backticks is computed by evaluating any included expressions, converting the values of those expressions to strings and combining those computed strings with the literal characters within the backticks.

```js
let name = "Bill";

let greeting = `Hello ${name}.`;
// "Hello Bill." 
```

```js
let a = 5, b = 10;
let result = `${a} + ${b} = ${a + b}`; // "5 + 10 = 15"
```

```js
let phrase = `Backticks allow embedding expressions like ${str}`; // Template literal (backticks)

let combined = `${str} ${phrase}`;  // String concatenation using template literals

alert(`1 + 2 = ${sum(1, 2)}.`);  // Using template literals to embed function results
```

```js
let name = "John";
console.log(`Hello, ${name}`); // Hello, John

console.log(`The result of 1 + 2 is ${1 + 2}`); // The result of 1 + 2 is 3
```

- **Multiline strings**: Unlike regular strings enclosed in quotes, template literals can span multiple lines without the need for escape characters.
  
```js
let multiline = `This is a string
that spans multiple lines.`;

let errorMessage = '\
\u2718 Test failure at ${filename}: ${linenumber}:
${exception.message}
Stack trace:
${exception.stack}
';
```

### Tagged template literals

```js
'\n'.length   // 1    one character

String.raw`\n`.length  
//  2   backslash and n
```

A powerful but less commonly used feature of template literals is that, if a function name (or “tag”) comes right before the opening backtick, then the text and the values of the expressions within the template literal are passed to the function. The value of this “tagged template literal” is the return value of the function. 
This could be used, for example, to apply HTML or SQL escaping to the values before substituting them
into the text.

ES6 has one built-in tag function: `String.raw()`. It returns the text within backticks without any processing of backslash escapes

Note that even though the tag portion of a tagged template literal is a function, there
are no parentheses used in its invocation. In this very specific case, the backtick char‐
acters replace the open and close parentheses.
The ability to define your own template tag functions is a powerful feature of Java‐Script. These functions do not need to return strings, and they can be used like constructors, as if defining a new literal syntax for the language.

### Escaping Characters

Escaping characters allows you to treat characters as literal text when needed. This is useful for special characters such as quotes, newlines, or backslashes that might otherwise have special meaning in JavaScript.

- **Escape sequences**:
  - `\n`: Newline character
  - `\t`: Tab character
  - `\\`: Backslash
  - `\'`: Single quote
  - `\"`: Double quote
  - `\0` : Null Character
  - `\b` : Backspace
  - `\v` : Vertical tab

  ```js
  First line and\nThis is second line
  A newline character is "\n"
  A newline character is \"\\n\"

  let message = "First line\nSecond line";
  console.log(message);  // First line (new line) Second line
  
  const quote = "I\'ve got no right to take my place";  // Escape single quote
  console.log(quote);  // I've got no right to take my place
  ```

### Concatenation

Concatenation is the process of combining two or more strings into one string. You can use the `+` operator to concatenate strings.

```js
let first = "Hello";
let second = "World";
let combined = first + " " + second;  // "Hello World"

let name = "con" + "cat" + "e" + "nate"
```

If any of the operands is a string, the other will be converted to a string and concatenated.
```js
alert('1' + 2);    // "12" (number 2 converted to string)
alert(2 + "1");    // "21" (number 2 converted to string)
```

JavaScript concatenates strings from **left to right**:
```js
alert(2 + 1 + "1");    // "31" (2 + 1 = 3, then "3" + "1" = "31")
alert("2" + 1 + 1);    // "211" ("2" + 1 = "21", then "21" + 1 = "211")
```

All other math operators try to convert string to number and do the operation but not `+`

The `String()` function can explicitly convert other data types to strings.
```js
let number = 123;
let str = String(number);   // Converts the number to a string
console.log(str);           // "123"
```

____

Strings can be compared with the standard === equality and !== inequality operators: two strings are equal if and only if they consist of exactly the same sequence of 16-bit values. Strings can also be compared with the <, <=, >, and >= operators

