Add-on/0 Root.md, before:

[[Chrome]] basics
[[Git]] basics
[[VScode]] basics

[[Coding Intro]] 
[[0 Linux]] terminal basics
[[0 HTML]] basics
[[0 CSS]] basics



# External Links
### Socials of Odin project
[TOP Discord](https://discord.gg/theodinproject) 
[Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)
[Insta](https://www.instagram.com/theodinproject/)

### Tutorial and Practice
[Typing](https://www.typing.com/)
[Typingclub](https://www.typingclub.com/)
[Monkeytype](https://monkeytype.com/)
[100 days of code](https://www.100daysofcode.com/)
[On googling problems](https://codinginflow.com/google-programming-questions)


### HTML, CSS, JavaScript
[API Documentations](https://devdocs.io/)

[Responsive web design course at freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/responsive-web-design/)
[Front end development libraries course](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/front-end-development-libraries/)
[HTML crash course](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/html-crash-course/)
[Another HTML Course](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LGQuIIv2RVA)

[List of defined HTML tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element)
[HTML Structure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Getting_started#anatomy_of_an_html_element)

[Brutal web design](https://brutalistwebsites.com/)


[CSS reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference)
[CSS Legal Color Values](https://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_colors_legal.asp)
[CSS Backgrounds and borders](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_backgrounds_and_borders)


[netlify for launching my site](https://www.netlify.com/)

Scrimba is great interactive learning

Commit message:

JavaScript started and CSS basics done. End of Odin Introduction

Add-on/0 Root.md, after:

[[Chrome]] basics
[[Git]] basics
[[VScode]] basics
[[Obsidian]]


[[Coding Intro]] 

# External Links
### Socials of Odin project
[TOP Discord](https://discord.gg/theodinproject) 
[Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)
[Insta](https://www.instagram.com/theodinproject/)

### Tutorial and Practice
[Typing](https://www.typing.com/)
[Typingclub](https://www.typingclub.com/)
[Monkeytype](https://monkeytype.com/)
[100 days of code](https://www.100daysofcode.com/)
[On googling problems](https://codinginflow.com/google-programming-questions)


### HTML, CSS, JavaScript
[API Documentations](https://devdocs.io/)

[Responsive web design course at freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/responsive-web-design/)
[Front end development libraries course](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/front-end-development-libraries/)
[HTML crash course](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/html-crash-course/)
[Another HTML Course](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LGQuIIv2RVA)

[List of defined HTML tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element)
[HTML Structure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/Getting_started#anatomy_of_an_html_element)

[Brutal web design](https://brutalistwebsites.com/)


[CSS reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference)
[CSS Legal Color Values](https://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_colors_legal.asp)
[CSS Backgrounds and borders](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_backgrounds_and_borders)


[netlify for launching my site](https://www.netlify.com/)
can connect it to github by importing existing project, install netlify on github

Scrimba is great interactive learning
