Add-on/Chrome.md, before:

[Chrome shortcuts](https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/157179?hl=en&co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop#zippy=%2Ctab-window-shortcuts)

# Tab and Windows Shortcuts

| **Action**                                                           | **Shortcut**                                       |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Open a new window                                                    | **Ctrl + n**                                       |
| Open a new window in Incognito mode                                  | **Ctrl + Shift + n**                               |
| Open a new tab, and jump to it                                       | **Ctrl + t**                                       |
| Reopen previously closed tabs in the order they were closed          | **Ctrl + Shift + t**                               |
| Jump to the next open tab                                            | **Ctrl + Tab** or **Ctrl + PgDn**                  |
| Jump to the previous open tab                                        | **Ctrl + Shift + Tab** or **Ctrl + PgUp**          |
| Jump to a specific tab                                               | **Ctrl + 1** through **Ctrl + 8**                  |
| Jump to the rightmost tab                                            | **Ctrl + 9**                                       |
| Open your home page in the current tab                               | **Alt + Home**                                     |
| Open the previous page from your browsing history in the current tab | **Alt + Left arrow**                               |
| Open the next page from your browsing history in the current tab     | **Alt + Right arrow**                              |
| Close the current tab                                                | **Ctrl + w** or **Ctrl + F4**                      |
| Close the current window                                             | **Ctrl + Shift + w** or **Alt + F4**               |
| Minimize the current window                                          | **Alt + Space** then **n**                         |
| Maximize the current window                                          | **Alt + Space** then **x**                         |
| Quit Google Chrome                                                   | **Alt + f** then **x**                             |
| Move tabs right or left                                              | **Ctrl + Shift + PgUp** or **Ctrl + Shift + PgDn** |

# Chrome Features Shortcut

| **Action**                                                     | **Shortcut**                    |
| -------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Open the Chrome menu                                           | **Alt + f** or **Alt + e**      |
| Show or hide the Bookmarks bar                                 | **Ctrl + Shift + b**            |
| Open the Bookmarks Manager                                     | **Ctrl + Shift + o**            |
| Open the History page in a new tab                             | **Ctrl + h**                    |
| Open the Downloads page in a new tab                           | **Ctrl + j**                    |
| Open the Chrome Task Manager                                   | **Shift + Esc**                 |
| Set focus on the first item in the Chrome toolbar              | **Shift + Alt + t**             |
| Set focus on the rightmost item in the Chrome toolbar          | **F10**                         |
| Switch focus to unfocused dialog (if showing) and all toolbars | **F6**                          |
| Open the Find Bar to search the current page                   | **Ctrl + f** or **F3**          |
| Jump to the next match to your Find Bar search                 | **Ctrl + g**                    |
| Jump to the previous match to your Find Bar search             | **Ctrl + Shift + g**            |
| Open Developer Tools                                           | **Ctrl + Shift + j** or **F12** |
| Open the Delete Browsing Data options                          | **Ctrl + Shift + Delete**       |
| Open the Chrome Help Center in a new tab                       | **F1**                          |
| Log in a different user or browse as a Guest                   | **Ctrl + Shift + m**            |
| Open a feedback form                                           | **Alt + Shift + i**             |
| Turn on caret browsing                                         | **F7**                          |
| Skip to web contents                                           | **Ctrl + F6**                   |
| Focus on inactive dialogs                                      | **Alt + Shift + a**             |

# Webpage

| **Action**                                                             | **Shortcut**                           |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| Open options to print the current page                                 | **Ctrl + p**                           |
| Open options to save the current page                                  | **Ctrl + s**                           |
| Reload the current page                                                | **F5** or **Ctrl + r**                 |
| Reload the current page, ignoring cached content                       | **Shift + F5** or **Ctrl + Shift + r** |
| Stop the page loading                                                  | **Esc**                                |
| Browse clickable items moving forward                                  | **Tab**                                |
| Browse clickable items moving backward                                 | **Shift + Tab**                        |
| Open a file from your computer in Chrome                               | **Ctrl + o +** Select a file           |
| Display non-editable HTML source code for the current page             | **Ctrl + u**                           |
| Save your current webpage as a bookmark                                | **Ctrl + d**                           |
| Save all open tabs as bookmarks in a new folder                        | **Ctrl + Shift + d**                   |
| Turn full-screen mode on or off                                        | **F11**                                |
| Make everything on the page bigger                                     | **Ctrl and +**                         |
| Make everything on the page smaller                                    | **Ctrl and -**                         |
| Return everything on the page to default size                          | **Ctrl + 0**                           |
| Scroll down a webpage, a screen at a time                              | **Space** or **PgDn**                  |
| Scroll up a webpage, a screen at a time                                | **Shift + Space** or **PgUp**          |
| Go to the top of the page                                              | **Home**                               |
| Go to the bottom of the page                                           | **End**                                |
| Scroll horizontally on the page                                        | **Shift +** Scroll your mousewheel     |
| Move your cursor to the beginning of the previous word in a text field | **Ctrl + Left arrow**                  |
| Move your cursor to the next word                                      | **Ctrl + Right arrow**                 |
| Delete the previous word in a text field                               | **Ctrl + Backspace**                   |
| Open the Home page in the current tab                                  | **Alt + Home**                         |

Commit message:

JavaScript started and CSS basics done. End of Odin Introduction

Add-on/Chrome.md, after:

[Chrome shortcuts](https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/157179?hl=en&co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop#zippy=%2Ctab-window-shortcuts)

### Chrome Dev tools

1. Go through the following sections of the [official Chrome DevTools docs](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools):
    
    - [Devtools overview](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/overview/): don’t navigate to any other pages linked here; just get familiar with _what_ tools are available in the DevTools, rather than how to use all of them right now.
    - [Open Chrome DevTools](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/open/): similar to what we went over above, but with some nice extras.
    - [Get Started With Viewing And Changing The DOM](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/dom/): skip through any part that uses the JavaScript console.
    - [View and change CSS](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css): be sure to follow along with any interactive instructions!

	- This article about how we can [utilize CSS overview in the developer tools](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-use-css-overview-in-chrome-developer-tools/) to check the colors, font styles, media-queries, etc. used on a particular webpage.





# Tab and Windows Shortcuts

| **Action**                                                           | **Shortcut**                                       |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Open a new window                                                    | **Ctrl + n**                                       |
| Open a new window in Incognito mode                                  | **Ctrl + Shift + n**                               |
| Open a new tab, and jump to it                                       | **Ctrl + t**                                       |
| Reopen previously closed tabs in the order they were closed          | **Ctrl + Shift + t**                               |
| Jump to the next open tab                                            | **Ctrl + Tab** or **Ctrl + PgDn**                  |
| Jump to the previous open tab                                        | **Ctrl + Shift + Tab** or **Ctrl + PgUp**          |
| Jump to a specific tab                                               | **Ctrl + 1** through **Ctrl + 8**                  |
| Jump to the rightmost tab                                            | **Ctrl + 9**                                       |
| Open your home page in the current tab                               | **Alt + Home**                                     |
| Open the previous page from your browsing history in the current tab | **Alt + Left arrow**                               |
| Open the next page from your browsing history in the current tab     | **Alt + Right arrow**                              |
| Close the current tab                                                | **Ctrl + w** or **Ctrl + F4**                      |
| Close the current window                                             | **Ctrl + Shift + w** or **Alt + F4**               |
| Minimize the current window                                          | **Alt + Space** then **n**                         |
| Maximize the current window                                          | **Alt + Space** then **x**                         |
| Quit Google Chrome                                                   | **Alt + f** then **x**                             |
| Move tabs right or left                                              | **Ctrl + Shift + PgUp** or **Ctrl + Shift + PgDn** |

# Chrome Features Shortcut

| **Action**                                                     | **Shortcut**                    |
| -------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Open the Chrome menu                                           | **Alt + f** or **Alt + e**      |
| Show or hide the Bookmarks bar                                 | **Ctrl + Shift + b**            |
| Open the Bookmarks Manager                                     | **Ctrl + Shift + o**            |
| Open the History page in a new tab                             | **Ctrl + h**                    |
| Open the Downloads page in a new tab                           | **Ctrl + j**                    |
| Open the Chrome Task Manager                                   | **Shift + Esc**                 |
| Set focus on the first item in the Chrome toolbar              | **Shift + Alt + t**             |
| Set focus on the rightmost item in the Chrome toolbar          | **F10**                         |
| Switch focus to unfocused dialog (if showing) and all toolbars | **F6**                          |
| Open the Find Bar to search the current page                   | **Ctrl + f** or **F3**          |
| Jump to the next match to your Find Bar search                 | **Ctrl + g**                    |
| Jump to the previous match to your Find Bar search             | **Ctrl + Shift + g**            |
| Open Developer Tools                                           | **Ctrl + Shift + j** or **F12** |
| Open the Delete Browsing Data options                          | **Ctrl + Shift + Delete**       |
| Open the Chrome Help Center in a new tab                       | **F1**                          |
| Log in a different user or browse as a Guest                   | **Ctrl + Shift + m**            |
| Open a feedback form                                           | **Alt + Shift + i**             |
| Turn on caret browsing                                         | **F7**                          |
| Skip to web contents                                           | **Ctrl + F6**                   |
| Focus on inactive dialogs                                      | **Alt + Shift + a**             |

# Webpage

| **Action**                                                             | **Shortcut**                           |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| Open options to print the current page                                 | **Ctrl + p**                           |
| Open options to save the current page                                  | **Ctrl + s**                           |
| Reload the current page                                                | **F5** or **Ctrl + r**                 |
| Reload the current page, ignoring cached content                       | **Shift + F5** or **Ctrl + Shift + r** |
| Stop the page loading                                                  | **Esc**                                |
| Browse clickable items moving forward                                  | **Tab**                                |
| Browse clickable items moving backward                                 | **Shift + Tab**                        |
| Open a file from your computer in Chrome                               | **Ctrl + o +** Select a file           |
| Display non-editable HTML source code for the current page             | **Ctrl + u**                           |
| Save your current webpage as a bookmark                                | **Ctrl + d**                           |
| Save all open tabs as bookmarks in a new folder                        | **Ctrl + Shift + d**                   |
| Turn full-screen mode on or off                                        | **F11**                                |
| Make everything on the page bigger                                     | **Ctrl and +**                         |
| Make everything on the page smaller                                    | **Ctrl and -**                         |
| Return everything on the page to default size                          | **Ctrl + 0**                           |
| Scroll down a webpage, a screen at a time                              | **Space** or **PgDn**                  |
| Scroll up a webpage, a screen at a time                                | **Shift + Space** or **PgUp**          |
| Go to the top of the page                                              | **Home**                               |
| Go to the bottom of the page                                           | **End**                                |
| Scroll horizontally on the page                                        | **Shift +** Scroll your mousewheel     |
| Move your cursor to the beginning of the previous word in a text field | **Ctrl + Left arrow**                  |
| Move your cursor to the next word                                      | **Ctrl + Right arrow**                 |
| Delete the previous word in a text field                               | **Ctrl + Backspace**                   |
| Open the Home page in the current tab                                  | **Alt + Home**                         |
