

The way data are structures in the system.

#### 1.10.1 Lists, Stacks and Queues

Main memory is constructed as an array.

Linked lists accommodate items of varying sizes and allow easy insertion and deletion of items.
They are used for constructing more powerful data structures, such as stacks and queues.

An operating system often uses a stack when invoking function calls.

Tasks that are waiting to be run on an available CPU are often organized in queues.


#### 1.10.2 Trees

A tree is a data structure that can be used to represent data hierarchically. 

Data values in a tree structure are linked through parent–child relationships. In a general tree, a parent may have an unlimited number of children. 

In a binary tree, a parent may have at most two children, which we term the left child and the right child. 
A binary search tree additionally requires an ordering between the parent’s two children in which left child <= right child.

Balanced binary search tree containing n items has at most log n levels, thus ensuring worst-case performance of O(log n).

> Linux uses a balanced binary search tree as part its CPU-scheduling algorithm.


#### 1.10.3 Hash Function and Maps

A hash function takes data as its input, performs a numeric operation on this data, and returns a numeric value. This numeric value can then be used as an index into a table (typically an array) to quickly retrieve the data. 

Searching for a data item through a list of size n can require up to O(n)
comparisons in the worst case, using a hash function for retrieving data from table can be as good as O(1) in the worst case.

Because of this performance, hash functions are used extensively in
operating systems.


One potential difﬁculty with hash functions is that two inputs can result
in the same output value linking to the same table location.
We can accommodate this hash collision by having a linked list at that table location that contains all of the items with the same hash value. 

One use of a hash function is to implement a hash map, which associates (or maps) `[key:value]` pairs using a hash function. 

Suppose that a user name is mapped to a password.
A user enters his user name and password. 
The hash function is applied to the user name, which is then
used to retrieve the password. 
The retrieved password is then compared with the password entered by the user for authentication.


#### 1.10.4 Bitmaps

A bitmap is a string of n binary digits that can be used to represent the status of n items. 
Suppose we have several resources, and the availability of each resource is indicated by the value of a binary digit: 0 means that the resource is available, while 1 indicates that it is unavailable (or vice-versa). The value of the `i th` position in the bitmap is associated with the `i th` resource. 
`001011101` Resources 2, 4, 5, 6, and 8 are unavailable; resources 0, 1, 3, and 7 are available.

The power of bitmaps becomes apparent when we consider their space efﬁciency.

A medium-sized disk drive might be divided into several thousand individual units, called disk blocks. 
A bitmap can be used to indicate the availability of each disk block.

