# Bindings / Variables

To maintain the internal state, to catch and hold values, `js` provides *bindings* or *variables*

***Binding Names***
No key words and reserved words,
No numbers in the beginning
No punctuation or special characters except `$ and _`
camel case is used for naming `yourName, squareRoot`

***Comments***
`//` for single line
`/*   */` for multi line comments
______
### `var`
`var`  was old way of declaring variable now removed.


### `let`

	`let caught = 5*5;`
the key word `let` indicates that this sentence is going to define a binding.
It is followed by the name of that binding and
immediately give it a value by an `=` operator and an expression.

The binding is not tied to that value, it can be disconnected from current value and have them point to a new one;  `let mood = "light"`      `mood = "dark"`

> `let` is used to create a variable, reassignment do not need it.

If a binding it defined without a value, it gets a value `undefined`

A single `let` can define multiple bindings, definition must be separated by a comma.
`let one = 1, two = 2;`


Names cannot be a reserved keywords, not starting with number,
no space or hyphon ' - ',
use meaningful and descriptive name
Camel case is used, first letter small, subsequent are capital,  `firstName` 
names are case sensitive.
____

### `const`

stands for constant and defines a constant binding that points to the same value as long as it lives.
A value of a constant cannot change, gives error when tried to change.
 `const pi = 3.142;`
 
___
