
1. Illustrate any two page-replacement algorithms for the following reference string: 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Given the page reference string: 1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 2, 1, 2, 3, 7, 6, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 6, and 3 frames, compare the number of page faults for the following page replacement algorithms: LRU, FIFO, Optimal page replacement algorithm.

3. A process references 5 pages (A, B, C, D, E) in the following order: A, B, C, D, A, E, B, C, E, D. Assuming the replacement algorithms are FIFO, LRU, and Optimal, find out the number of page faults during the sequence of references, starting with an empty main memory with 3 frames.

4. A process references 5 pages (A, B, C, D, E) in the following order: A, B, C, D, A, E, B, C, E, D. Assuming the replacement algorithms are FIFO, LRU, and Optimal, find out the number of page faults during the sequence of references, starting with an empty main memory with 3 frames.

5. A small computer has 4 page frames. A process makes the following list of page references: 1, 2, 3, 4, 0, 3, 2, 1, 5, 2, 3, 1, 2, 5, 0. How many page faults occur using FIFO, LRU, and Optimal page replacement algorithms?

6. Consider the following page reference string: 1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 2, 1, 2, 3, 7, 6, 3, 2, 3, 6. Find out the number of page faults, assuming 3 frames, using: FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithm.

7. Consider the following page reference string: 1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 2, 1, 2, 3, 7, 6, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 6. How many page faults would occur in the case of:  FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithms assuming three and four frames?

8. A computer has 4 page frames. A process makes the following list of page references: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 3, 2, 1, 5, 2, 3, 1, 2, 5, 6. How many page faults occur using: FIFO,  LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithms?  Consider that initially 3 frames are filled for FIFO, 2 frames are filled for LRU, and 1 frame is filled for Optimal page replacement.

9. Consider the reference string 7, 2, 3, 4, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 2, 3, 1, 8, 7, 3, 2, 4, 1, 1, 2 with 3 memory frames. Determine the page faults using: FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithm. Consider that initially 3 frames are filled.

10. Consider the reference string 1, 2, 3, 4, 2, 2, 5, 3, 2, 1, 6, 3, 4, 5, 3, 1 with 3 memory frames. Determine the page faults using: FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithm.

11. A small computer has 3 page frames. A process makes the following list of page references: 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 4, 3, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 5. How many page faults occur using FIFO, LRU, and Optimal page replacement algorithms?

12. A small computer has 3 page frames. A process makes the following list of page references: 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 4, 3, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 5. How many page faults occur using FIFO, LRU, and Optimal page replacement algorithms?

13. Consider the reference string 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 5, 2, 5, 5, 6, 4, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4 with 4 memory frames. Determine the page fault using: FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithm.

14. Consider the reference string 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 5, 2, 5, 5, 6, 4, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4 with 4 memory frames. Determine the page fault using: FIFO, LRU, Optimal page replacement algorithm.


