# Defining a Function
Three ways in which a function can be defined.

### 1. Function Expression

A function definition is a regular binding and the value of the binding is a function. This allows for creating a function in the middle of any expression.

As the function creation happens in the context of the assignment expression (to the right side of `=`), this is a _Function Expression_.

Function expressions are created when the execution reaches them so only usable after that moment. So cannot be called before they are declared.
```js
const square = function(x) {
	return x * x;
};
console.log(square(12));
// 144
```
Here a `square` is defined to refer to a function that produces the square of a given number.

A function starts with the keyword `function`.
`function` can have a set of `parameters` which are the inputs  and 
`body` in `{}` which contain the statement that are to be executed when the function is called.

Function can have no parameters or multiple parameters.
The `return` keyword determines what gets returned, functions jumps out of function and return the value, if there is no expression before the return, it returns `undefined`.
```js
const makeNoise = function() {
	console.log("Ping!");
};
makeNoise();
// Ping!

const roundTo = function(n, step) {
	let remainder = n % step;
	return n - remainder + (remainder < step/ 2?0 : step);
};
console.log(roundTo(23, 10));
// 20
```
   - If `remainder` is less than half of `step`, it adds `0`, meaning it rounds down to the nearest multiple of `step`.
   - If `remainder` is equal to or greater than half of `step`, it adds `step`, which rounds up to the next multiple of `step`.
##### Python implementation of the same
```python
def makeNoise:
	print ("Ping!")
makeNoise()

def roundTo(n, step):
	remainder = n % step
	if remainder >= step/2:
		return ( (n - remainder) + step)
	return (n - remainder)
print(roundTo(23,10))
```

***semicolon at the end***
Function Expressions have a semicolon `;` at the end, but Function Declarations do not.

a Function Expression is created here as `function(…) {…}` inside the `=` assignment statement: 
`let sayHi = …;`.
The semicolon `;` is recommended at the end of the statement, it’s not a part of the function syntax.

```js
function sayHi() {
	//..
}

let sayHi = function() {
	// ..
};
```

__________

## 2. Function Declaration

The `function` keyword goes first, then goes the _name of the function_, then a list of _parameters_ between the parentheses (comma-separated) and finally the code of the function, also named “the function body”, between curly braces.
```js
function name(parameter1, parameter2, ... parameterN) {
	//body
}
```

```js
function square(x) {
	return x * x;
}

//usually
let square = function(x) {
	return x * x;
};

square(x);
```
When the `function` key word is used at start of statement,
it defined the binding `square` and points it at the given function. Doesn't require semicolon after the function.

Function declaration is created when `js` is preparing to start the script and is visible everywhere.
**A Function Declaration can be called earlier than it is defined.**

> Function declarations are not part of regular Top-to-bottom flow of control.
> They are conceptually moved to the top of their local scope and can be used by all the code in that scope.
> This sometimes offers freedom to order the code in a way that makes sense instead of trying to define all the functions before they are used.

```js
console.log ("The future says: ", future());

function future() {
	return "You will never have flying cars";
}
```

**when a Function Declaration is within a code block, it’s visible everywhere inside that block. But not outside of it.**
So calling it from outside is not possible.

So better to declare a function using `function expression` outside a code block first, and reassign it inside the code block. This makes the function visible from outside also.
```js
let age = 18;

let welcome:  // defining the function

if (age <18) {
	welcome = function() {
		alert("Hello");
		};
}else {
	welcome = function() {
		alert("greetings");
		};
}

welcome();
```

```js
let age = prompt("What is your age", 18);

let welcome = (age < 18) ? function() {alert("Hello");} :
		function() { alert("Greetings"); };
welcome();
```

___

