
### 1.2.1 Computer System Operation

One or more CPU connected to many device controllers, connected through a common bus which provides access to shared memory.
Disk controller for disks,
USB controller for mouse, keyboard, printer,
Graphics adapter for monitor
All controllers connected to CPU along with memory.

[Image of modern computing system]

***Bootstrap program*** - is the initial program needed for the system to run when powered up or rebooted.
It is a simple program stored in ROM or EEPROM (Electrically erasable programmable ROM) which is also known as ***firmware***.
* It initializes all aspects of the system, from **CPU registers** to **device controllers** to **memory contents**.
* It has to locate the OS kernel, load it to memory and start executing it.
* Once the ***OS Kernel*** is executing, it can provide services to system and users.

***System Processes*** or ***System Daemons*** are programs that are loaded into memory at boot time to run the entire time the kernel is running. These provide services outside of the kernel.

> **init** is the first system process/daemon in UNIX, and starts many other daemons. Once this is complete, the system is fully booted, and the system waits for some event to occur.

***Interrupt*** is the signal that a event has occurred. It can be either from hardware or software.
* Hardware may trigger an interrupt at any time by sending signal to the CPU through the **System Bus**.
* Software may trigger an interrupt by executing a special operation called a **System call** or **Monitor call**

***Service Routine*** 
When CPU is interrupted, it stops its process and transfers the execution to a fixed location that contains the address where the service routine for the interrupt is located.
The interrupt service routine executes.
The table/array of pointers to interrupt routines are stored in low memory for quick transfers.

This array or ***Interrupt vector*** of addresses in then indexed by a unique device number, given with the interrupt request to get the *interrupt service routine* for the interrupting device.

The interrupted architecture will store the address of the interrupted instruction on the ***system stack***.
So if it has to change the processor state, then it has to save the current state and restore it before returning.
When the interrupt is serviced, the saved address in stack is loaded into the ***program counter***, and the interrupted computation resumes where it had left off.


### 1.2.2 Storage Structure

CPU can load instructions only from memory, so a program must be in memory to be run. General purpose computes run their programs from re-writable memory called main memory (RAM).
Main memory is implemented in DRAM.

***Memory Hierarchy of Cost and Performance*** 
* Registers
* Cache
* Main Memory
* SSD
Magnetic Disk
Optical Disk
Magnetic tapes


> ROM is not re-writable so it stores only static programs like bootstrap programs.
> 
> Smartphones have EEPROM to store their factory installed programs, it can be changed but not frequently.
> 
> Volatile memories lose their state and it's contents when power is off.


#### 1.2.3  I/O Structure

Storage is one of many I/O devices. Large part of OS is for managing these.
Device controllers are in charge of a specific type of devices.
Device Drivers, Device Controllers

> Switch is used instead of bus architecture to allow multiple components to talk to other components concurrently instead of competing for cycles on a shared bus.



