
OS provides an environment in which programs are executed.

***Multi-programming*** increases the CPU utilization by organizing jobs so that the CPU always has one job to execute.      
While one job begins to execute and and has to wait some time for some task like I/O response, instead of sitting idle, it switches to and executes another job.

___

***Time Sharing*** or ***Multitasking*** is a logical extension of multi-programming. The CPU executes multiple jobs by switching among them, but the switches occur so frequently that the user can interact with each program while it is running.

***Time sharing OS*** can allow many users to share the computer simultaneously. It uses CPU Scheduling and multi-programming to provide each user with a time shared computer.

***Process*** is a program loaded to memory and which is executing.
Each user has at least one separate program in memory.

***Job Scheduling*** happens when there are several jobs ready to be brought into memory, and if there is not enough room for them, then the system must choose among them.
Making this decision involves job scheduling.

***CPU Scheduling*** is making the decision on which job to run first when there are several jobs ready to run at the same time.

> Running multiple jobs concurrently requires that their ability to affect one another be limited in all phases of operating system, process scheduling, disk storage, memory management.

___

***Swapping*** is where the processes are swapped in and out of main memory to the disk. This allows for reasonable response time.

***Virtual memory*** is also used for ensuring reasonable response times. It allows for executing processes which are not completely in memory. This allows for running programs that are larger than the physical memory.     
It abstracts the main memory into large, uniform array of storage, separating ***logical memory*** as viewed by the user from physical memory. Solves memory storage limitation.


A time sharing OS must also provide file system, disk management, mechanism for protecting resources from inappropriate use. 
Mechanism for job synchronization and communication for orderly execution.
Also ensure that jobs do not get stuck in deadlock, waiting forever for one another.

