
To make the computer system convenient for users, the OS provides a uniform, logical view of information storage.

The operating system abstracts from the physical properties of its storage devices to deﬁne a logical storage unit, the ***ﬁle***. 
OS maps ﬁles onto physical media and accesses these ﬁles via the storage devices.


#### 1.8.1 File-System Management

Computers can store information on several different types of physical media. 
Magnetic disk, optical disk, and magnetic tape are the most common. Each of these media has its own characteristics and physical organization. 
Each has its own unique properties like access speed, capacity, data-transfer rate, and access method (sequential or random).

The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connection with ﬁle management:
• Creating and deleting ﬁles
• Creating and deleting directories to organize ﬁles
• Supporting primitives for manipulating ﬁles and directories
• Mapping ﬁles onto secondary storage
• Backing up ﬁles on stable (nonvolatile) storage media


#### 1.8.2 Mass-Storage Management

Computer must provide secondary storage to backup main memory.
Most programs—including compilers, assemblers, word processors, editors, and formatters—are stored on a disk until loaded into memory.

They then use the disk ask both the source and destination of the processing.

• Free-space management
• Storage allocation
• Disk scheduling

The entire speed of operation of a computer may hinge on the speeds of the disk subsystem and the algorithms that manipulate that subsystem.


#### 1.8.3 Caching

Information is normally kept in some storage system (such as main memory).
As it is used, it is copied into a faster storage system—the cache —on a temporary basis. When we need a particular piece of information, we ﬁrst check whether it is in the cache. If it is, we use the information directly from the cache. If it is not, we use the information from the source, putting a copy in the cache under the assumption that we will need it again soon.




#### 1.8.4 I/O Systems
