

### 2.2.1 Command Interpreters

On systems with multiple command interpreters to choose from, the interpreters are known as shells. 
For example, on UNIX and Linux systems, a user may choose among several different shells, including the Bourne shell, C shell, Bourne-Again shell, Korn shell, and others.

UNIX, among other operating systems implements most commands through system programs. 
In this case, the command interpreter does not understand the command in any way; it merely uses the command to identify a ﬁle to be loaded into memory and executed.
Thus, the UNIX command to delete a ﬁle `rm file.txt`
would search for a file called `rm`, load it into memory, and execute it with the parameter `file.txt`.
The function associated with the `rm` command would be defined completely by the code in the file `rm`.

In this way programmers can add new commands to the system easily by creating new files with the proper names.



### 2.2.2 Graphical User Interface

KDE (K Desktop Environment), GNOME desktop by GNU project.


### 2.2.3 Choice of Interface

System administrators who manage computers and power users who have deep knowledge of a system frequently use the command-line interface.

On some systems, only a subset of system functions is available via the GUI, leaving the less common tasks to those who are command-line knowledgeable. 

if a frequent task requires a set of command-line steps, those steps can be recorded into a ﬁle, and that ﬁle can be run just like a program.
The program is not compiled into executable code but rather is interpreted by the command-line interface. 
These shell scripts are very common on systems that are command-line oriented, such as UNIX and Linux.

