
## Part 1: Overview

> An operating system is software that manages the computer hardware.
> It acts as an intermediary between the user of a computer and the computer hardware.
> The purpose of an operating system is to provide an environment in which a user can execute programs in a convenient and efficient manner.


Internally, operating systems vary greatly in their makeup, since they are organized along many different lines. 

The design of a new operating system is a major task, and it is important that the goals of the system be well defined before the design begins, with carefully defined inputs, outputs, and functions.


### Chapter 1: Introduction

An Operating system is a software that manages a computer's hardware, so the fundamental responsibility of an operating system is to **allocate** the computer resources (CPU, Memory, I/O devices, Storage) to programs.
Hence OS acts as an **intermediary** between the computer user and the computer hardware, to make the user experience *convenient* and *efficient*.

* Mainframe OS designed to optimize the utilization of hardware.
* PC OS support games, business applications and everything in between.
* Mobile OS provide an environment in which the user can easily interface with computer to execute programs.

[Image, Abstract View of the components of a computer system]


### 1.1 - What Operating Systems Do

Computer System is made of four components
* Hardware
* Operating System
* Application Programs
* Users

**Hardware** consists of CPU, Memory and I/O devices which provide the basic resources for the system.
**Application programs** such as word processors, spreadsheets, compilers, web browsers will define the ways in which these resources are used to solve user's problems.
**Operating System** controls the hardware an coordinates its use among the various application programs for the various users. 

> OS performs no useful function by itself, it simply provides an environment within which other programs can do useful work. 


#### 1.1.1 - User View

A **PC** is optimized for just one person who is performing, not for multiple users. Personal Computer is designed more for ***ease of use*** with some attention to ***performance*** and none paid to ***resource utilization*** on how various hardware and software resources are shared.

In **Mainframe or Minicomputers** where the resource is shared and information is exchanged between users sitting at many terminals, the OS in such cases are designed for maximizing resource utilization - to assure that all available CPU time, memory, I/O are used efficiently and that no individual user takes more than their fair share.

In ***workstations*** connected to networks of other workstations and servers. They have a dedicated resources at their disposal but also share resources and information.
Their OS is designed to compromise between individual usability and resource utilization.


#### 1.1.2 - System View

OS can be viewed as ***Resource allocator*** as it is the program most intimately involved with the hardware.

**Resource allocation** is especially important where many users access the same mainframe or minicomputer.

To operate the system efficiently, the OS must decide how to allocate the available resources (CPU time, memory space, file-storage space, I/O devices etc) to specific programs and users when there are numerous or conflicting requests for resources.

Operating System is a **control program**, which manages the execution of user programs to prevent errors and improper use of the computer. 
It is especially concerned with the operation and control of I/O devices.


#### 1.1.3 - Defining Operating Systems

OS create a usable computing system.
The term OS covers many roles and functions because of different designs and uses of computers. Presently computers are preset in everything.

>[!info] 
>Code-breaking, trajectory plotting and government uses were first uses for of computers..
>
>1960 - Moore's Law predicted that the number of transistors on a Integrated circuit would double every 18 months. Which is still holding.

To solve problems of users, hardware are constructed.
Since bare hardware alone is not easy to use, application programs are developed.
These programs require certain common operations (controlling I/O devices, allocating resources), which are brought together into one piece of software which is the OS.

A common definition would be,
OS is the program running all the time on a computer - usually called ***Kernel***

Along with Kernel there are **System programs** and **Application programs**.

Mobile OS not include the Kernel but also ***middleware*** - a set of software frameworks that provide additional services to application developers.
Ex: IOS and Android have a core kernel along with middleware that supports database, multimedia and graphics.



Next Chapter [[1.5 Operating System Operations]]

_____
____

### Skipped Chapters

[[1.2 Computer-System Organization|1.2 Computer system organization]]
	1.2.1 Computer System Operation
	1.2.2 Storage Structure
	1.2.3 I/O Structure


[[1.3 Computer System Architecture|1.3 Computer System Architecture]]
	1.3.1 Single Processor system
	1.3.2 Multiprocessor Systems
	1.3.3 Clustered Systems

[[1.4 Operating System Structure|1.4 Operating System structure]]







