
Usage of Os in Different Computing environments.


#### 1.11.1 Traditional Computing

Web Technologies and WAN bandwidth are stretching the boundaries of traditional computing.

Companies establish portals, which provide web accessibility to their internal servers.

***Network Computers*** or ***Thin Clients*** which are essentially terminals that understand web-based computing are used in place of traditional workstations where more security or easier maintenance is desired.

#### 1.11.2 Mobile Computing


#### 1.11.3 Distributed Systems


#### 1.11.4 Client-Server Computing


#### 1.11.5 Peer-to-Peer Computing


#### 1.11.6 Virtualization

Virtualization is a technology that allows operating systems to run as applications within other operating systems.

***Emulation***
is used when the source CPU type is different from the target CPU type. Emulation comes at a heavy price. 
(Apple using Rosetta emulator which allowed applications compiled for IBM CPU to run on Intel CPU). 
In same way, an entire OS written for one platform to run on another.

***Interpretation***, is when a computer language is not compiled to native code but instead is either executed in its high-level form or translated to an intermediate form.

Java is always interpreted. Interpretation is a form of emulation, the high level language code is translated to native CPU instructions, emulating a theoretical virtual machine on which that language could run natively.
Java programs are run on "Java virtual machines", but technically those virtual machines are Java emulators.


With ***virtualization***, an operating system that is natively compiled for a particular CPU architecture runs within another operating system also native to that CPU.

[image for virtualization and VMware]



#### 1.11.7 Cloud Computing

Cloud computing is a type of computing that delivers computing, storage and applications as a service across a network.
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC3) is available for anyone on the internet.

Public Cloud
Private Cloud
Hybrid Cloud

• Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)—servers or storage available over the Internet (for example, storage available for making backup copies of production data)

• Software as a service (SaaS)—one or more applications (such as word processors or spreadsheets) available via the Internet

• Platform as a service (PaaS)—a software stack ready for application use via the Internet (for example, a database server)


#### 1.11.8 Real-Time Embedded System

These are the most prevalent type of computers which are in all kinds of devices with very specific tasks.
Their systems are limited, have little or no user interface. Mostly monitoring and managing hardware devices.

There are embedded systems with OS and special purpose applications to implement the functionality.
Others are devices with special purpose OS providing just the desired functionality.
Others are (ASICs) application-specific Integrated circuits that perform the tasks without an operating system.

Embedded Systems use ***Real-time operating system***.
A real-time system has well-deﬁned, ﬁxed time constraints. Processing
must be done within the deﬁned constraints, or the system will fail.

Systems that control scientiﬁc experiments, medical imaging systems, industrial control systems, and certain display systems are real-time systems. Some automobile-engine fuel-injection systems, home appliance controllers, and weapon systems are also real-time systems.





Next Chapter: 2.1 Operating-System Services

_____
____


#### Skipped Chapters

[[1.12 Open_Source Operating Systems|1.12 Open-Source Operating Systems]]
	1.12.1 History
	1.12.2 Linux
	1.12.3 BSD UNIX
	1.12.4 Solaris
	1.12.5 Open-Source Systems as Learning Tools
1.13 Summary

#### Practice Exercises




