
Modern OS are ***interrupt driven***.
if there are no I/O devices to service, no user to respond, they will sit idle, waiting for something to happen.

**Interrupts** or **trap** signals the occurrence of an event.

***trap*** or ***exception*** is a software-generated interrupt caused either by an error (division by zero, invalid memory access) or by a specific request from a user program that an operating-system service be performed.

For each type of interrupt, separate segments of code in the OS determine what action should be taken.

An **interrupt service routine** is provided to deal with the interrupt.

Since OS and Users share the hardware and software resources, a error in a user program should cause problems only for the one program running. 

A properly designed OS must ensure that an incorrect or malicious program cannot cause other programs to execute incorrectly.
* In a multi-programming systems, a process stuck in infinite loop can prevent the correct operation of many other programs.
* One erroneous program might modify another program, the data of another program or even the operating system.

>[!question]
>Trap and interrupt ??????

___

#### 1.5.1 Dual-Mode and Multi-mode Operation

Execution of User defined code and OS code must be distinguished.     
A bit called the ***mode bit*** is added to the hardware of the computer to indicate the current mode: kernel (0)  or  User (1).

The two basic modes of operation are,      
***User mode*** and ***Kernel mode*** (also called system mode, privileged mode, supervisor mode).

This dual mode of operation provides us a way to protect the OS and errant users from one another. This is accomplished by designating some of the machine instructions that may cause harm as ***privileged instructions***. These can be only executed in kernel mode.


[image for transition from user mode to kernel mode]

> Examples of privileged instructions are, 
> Instruction to switch to kernel mode, I/O control, timer management, interrupt management.

___

There can be more than two nodes where CPU has more than one bit to set and test the mode.

CPS's that support vitalization have a separate mode to indicate when a ***VMM (Virtual Machine Manager)*** and the virtualization management software is in control of the system.
In this mode VMM has more privilege than the user processes to create virtual machines, changing CPU state, but fewer than the kernel.

> Intel 64 family of CPU's support *privilege levels* and supports virtualization but does not have a separate mode for virtualization. 

___


At system boot time, the hardware starts in kernel mode.
The OS is then loaded and it starts the user applications in user mode.

When a user application requests a service from the operating system (via a system call), whenever a trap or interrupt occurs, the system must transition from user mode to kernel mode (changing mode bit to 0) to fulfill the request.

Whenever the OS takes control of the system it is in kernel mode. Before passing the control to a user program, the system always switches to user mode.


*Life cycle of instruction execution in a computer system.*
* Initial control resides in the operating system, where instructions are executed in kernel mode. 
* When control is given to a user application, the mode is set to user mode. 
* Eventually, control is switched back to the operating system via an interrupt, a trap, or a system call.

___

***System Calls*** are a method used by a process to request action by the operating system.
It provide a means for a user program to ask the OS to perform tasks reserved for the OS (Privileged instructions) on the users program's behalf.

A system call usually takes the form of a ***trap*** to a specific location in the ***Interrupt vector***.
This trap can be executed by a ***Generic trap instruction***.

> Systems like MIPS have specific `syscall` instruction to invoke a system call.

____

##### Execution of a system call

When a system call is executed, it is typically treated by the hardware
as a ***software interrupt***. 
* Control passes through the ***interrupt vector*** to a ***service routine*** in the operating system, and the mode bit is set to kernel mode. 
* The ***system-call service routine*** is a part of the operating system. 
* The kernel examines the interrupting instruction to determine what system call has occurred;
* A parameter indicates what type of service the user program is requesting.
* Additional information needed for the request may be passed in registers, on the stack, or in memory (with pointers to the memory locations passed in registers). 
* The kernel veriﬁes that the parameters are correct and legal, executes the request, and returns control to the instruction following the system call. 

>[!control passing]
> * Interrupt / Trap
> * Interrupt Vector
> * OS
> * Service routine (System-call service routine in OS)
> * Kernel

___

##### Preventing illegal execution

Once hardware protection is in place, it detects errors that violate modes. These errors are normally handled by the operating system.

* If a user program fails in some way—such as by making an attempt either to execute an illegal instruction or to access memory that is not in the user’s address space —then the hardware ***traps*** to the operating system.
* The trap transfers control through the interrupt vector to the operating system, just as an interrupt does. 
* When a program error occurs, the operating system must terminate the program abnormally. This situation is handled by the same code as a user-requested abnormal termination. 
* An appropriate error message is given, and the memory of the program may be dumped. 

The memory dump is usually written to a ﬁle so that the user or programmer can examine it and perhaps correct it and restart the program.


> The lack of a hardware-supported dual mode can cause serious shortcomings in an operating system.
> 
> MS-DOS was written for the Intel 8088 architecture, which has no mode bit and therefore no dual mode.
> A user program running awry can wipe out the operating system by writing over it with data; and multiple programs are able to write to a device at the same time, with potentially disastrous results. 


____

#### 1.5.2 Timer

A timer can be set to interrupt the computer after a specified period.
The period may be fixed (1/60 second) or a variable (1 millisecond to 1 second).

A ***variable timer*** is implemented by a **fixed-rate clock** and a **counter**.
OS sets the counter, every time the clock ticks, the counter is decremented. When it reaches 0, an interrupt occurs.
Instructions that modify the content of the timer are privileged.

Timer can prevent user programs getting stuck in infinite loop or to fail to call system service and never return control to the operating system. Timer can be used to prevent a user program from running too long by initializing a counter with the amount of time that a program is allowed to run.

> A program with a 7-minute time limit, would have its counter initialized to 420. 
> Every second, the timer interrupts, and the counter is decremented by 1.
> As long as the counter is positive, control is returned to the user program. 
> When the counter becomes negative, the operating system terminates the program for exceeding the assigned time limit.

> 10-bit counter with a 1-millisecond clock allows interrupts at intervals from 1 millisecond to 1,024 milliseconds, in steps of 1 millisecond.

Before turning over control to the user, the operating system ensures
that the timer is set to interrupt. If the timer interrupts, control transfers automatically to the operating system, which may treat the interrupt as a fatal error or may give the program more time.



Next chapter: [[1.11 Computing Environments]]

_________
________


#### Skipped Chapters

[[1.6 Process management|1.6 Process Management]]
[[1.7 Memory Management|1.7 Memory Management]]
[[1.8 Storage Management|1.8 Storage Management]]
	1.8.1 File-System Management
	1.8.2 Mass-Storage Management
	1.8.3 Caching
	1.8.4 I/O Systems
[[1.9 Protection and Security|1.9 Protection and Security]]
[[1.10 Kernel Data Structures|1.10 Kernel Data Structures]]
	1.10.1 Lists, Stacks and Queues
	1.10.2 Trees
	1.10.3 Hash Function and Maps
	1.10.4 Bitmaps