
Services of the OS, Interface of OS, Components are their interconnection.
These form the main three aspects of an OS.


[Image, A view of Operating System services]

User interface (GUI, batch, Command line)

System calls

Services (Program execution, I/O operations, file systems, communication, resource allocation, accounting, error detection, protection and security)

Set of OS services that provide functions that are helpful to the user.

***User Interface:***
All OS have a UI but in different forms.
Command-line interface (CLI), which uses text commands and a method for entering them.
Batch interface, in which commands and directives to control those commands are entered into files, and those files are executed.
Graphical User Interface (GUI) which is most common is a window system with a pointing device to direct I/O, choose from menus and make selections.
Some provide two or three of these variations.


***Program execution:*** 
The system must be able to load a program into memory and to run that program.
The program must be able to end its execution, either normally or abnormally (indicating error).

***I/O operations:***
A running program may require I/O, which may involve a ﬁle or an I/O device. 
For efﬁciency and protection, users usually cannot control I/O devices directly. Therefore, the operating system must provide a means to do I/O.

***File-system manipulation:***
Programs need to read and write ﬁles and directories. 
They also need to create and delete them by name, search for a given ﬁle, and list ﬁle information. 

Some operating systems include permissions management to allow or deny access to ﬁles or directories based on ﬁle ownership. 

Many operating systems provide a variety of ﬁle systems, sometimes to allow personal choice and sometimes to provide speciﬁc features or performance characteristics.


***Communications:*** 
When one process needs to exchange information with another process. 
Such communication may occur between processes that are executing on the same computer or between processes that are executing on different computer systems tied together by a computer network. 
Communications may be implemented via ***shared memory***, in which two or more processes read and write to a shared section of memory,
or ***message passing***, in which packets of information in predeﬁned formats are moved between processes by the operating system.


***Error detection:*** 
The operating system needs to be detecting and correcting errors constantly. 
Errors may occur in the CPU and memory hardware (such as a memory error or a power failure), 
in I/O devices (such as a parity error on disk, a connection failure on a network, or lack of paper in the printer), 
and in the user program (such as an arithmetic overﬂow, an attempt to access an illegal memory location, or a too-great use of CPU time). 

For each type of error, the operating system should take the appropriate action to ensure correct and consistent computing. Sometimes, it has no choice but to halt the system. At other times, it might terminate an error-causing process or return an error code to a process for the process to detect and possibly correct.




Another set of operating system functions exists not for helping the user but rather for ensuring the efﬁcient operation of the system itself. 

***Resource allocation:*** 
When there are multiple users or multiple jobs running at the same time, resources must be allocated to each of them.

The operating system manages many different types of resources. Some (such as CPU cycles, main memory, and ﬁle storage) may have special allocation code, whereas others (such as I/O devices) may have much more general request and release code. 

For instance, in determining how best to use the CPU, operating systems have CPU-scheduling routines that take into account the speed of the CPU, the jobs that must be executed, the number of
registers available, and other factors. 

There may also be routines to allocate printers, USB storage drives, and other peripheral devices.


***Accounting:***
We want to keep track of which users use how much and what kinds of computer resources. This record keeping may be used for accounting (so that users can be billed) or simply for accumulating usage statistics. 

Usage statistics may be a valuable tool for researchers who wish
to reconﬁgure the system to improve computing services.

***Protection and security:***
Protection involves ensuring that all access to system resources is controlled. 

* The owners of information stored in a multi-user or networked computer system may want to control use of that information.
* When several separate processes execute concurrently, it should not be possible for one process to interfere with the others or with the operating system itself. 

Security of the system from outsiders is also important. 
Such security starts with requiring each user to authenticate with password to gain access to system resources.

It extends to defending external I/O devices, including network adapters, from invalid access attempts and to recording all such connections for detection of break-ins.


Next Chapter: [[2.3 System Calls|2.3 System Calls]]

____
___

Skipped Chapter

[[2.2 User and Operating-System Interface|2.2 User and Operating-System Interface]]
	2.2.1 Command Interpreters
	2.2.2 Graphical User Interface
	2.2.3 Choice of Interface
	