
System Calls provide an interface to the services made available by an operating system.

These calls are generally available as routines written in C and C++.
In certain low level tasks for accessing the hardware, assembly language instructions.


System executes thousands of system calls per second.
Application developers design programs according to an (API) Application Programming Interface.
The API specifies the set of functions that are available to an application programmer, including the parameters that are passed to each function and the return values the programmer can expect.

Three of the most common API's available to Application programmer are ,
The Windows API for Windows systems,
POSIX API for POSIX based systems (which include virtually all versions of UNIX, LINUX and Mac OS), and
Java API for programs that run on the Java virtual machine.

> `libc` is the library of API for LINUX and UNIX

Behind the scenes, the function that make up an API typically invoke the actual system call on behalf of the programmer.
In windows `CreateProcess()` invokes `NTCreateProcess()` system call.
(Since Actual system calls can be actually more detailed and difficult to work with than the API)

**Program Portability**
An application program designed using an API can expect the program to compile and run on any system that supports the same API.



***System-Call Interface***
For most programming languages, the run-time support system (a set of functions built into libraries included with a compiler) provides a **system-call interface** that serves as the link to system calls made available by the operating system. 

The system-call interface intercepts function calls in the API and invokes the necessary system calls within the operating system and returns the status of the system call and any return values.

[Image, handling of a user application invoking the open() system call]


Three general methods are used to pass parameters to the operating system.

* The simplest approach is to pass the parameters in registers.
* In some cases, there may be more parameters than registers. These cases, the parameters are generally stored in a block, or table, in memory, and the address of the block is passed as a parameter in a register. (This is the approach taken by Linux and Solaris) 
* Parameters also can be placed, or pushed, onto the stack by the program and popped off the stack by the operating system. 
 
Some operating systems prefer the block or stack method because those approaches do not limit the number or length of parameters being passed.


[image, Passing parameters as a table]






Next Chapter: [[2.4 Types of System Calls]] 