
***System programs***, also known as ***system utilities***, provide a convenient environment for program development and execution.

Some of them are simply user interfaces to system calls. Others are considerably more complex. 

They can be divided into these categories:

***File management.*** These programs create, delete, copy, rename, print, dump, list, and generally manipulate ﬁles and directories.

***Status information.*** Some programs simply ask the system for the date, time, amount of available memory or disk space, number of users, or similar status information. 
Others are more complex, providing detailed performance, logging, and debugging information. 
Typically, these programs format and print the output to the terminal or other output devices or ﬁles or display it in a window of the GUI. Some systems also support a registry, which is used to store and retrieve conﬁguration information.

***File modiﬁcation.*** Several text editors may be available to create and
modify the content of ﬁles stored on disk or other storage devices. There may also be special commands to search contents of ﬁles or perform transformations of the text.

***Programming-language support.*** Compilers, assemblers, debuggers, and interpreters for common programming languages (such as C, C++, Java, and PERL) are often provided with the operating system or available as a separate download.

***Program loading and execution.*** Once a program is assembled or compiled, it must be loaded into memory to be executed. The system may provide absolute loaders, relocatable loaders, linkage editors, and overlay loaders. Debugging systems for either higher-level languages or machine language are needed as well.

***Communications.*** These programs provide the mechanism for creating virtual connections among processes, users, and computer systems. 
They allow users to send messages to one another’s screens, to browse Web pages, to send e-mail messages, to log in remotely, or to transfer ﬁles from one machine to another.

***Background services.*** All general-purpose systems have methods for
launching certain system-program processes at boot time. Some of these processes terminate after completing their tasks, while others continue to run until the system is halted. 

Constantly running system-program processes are known as ***services, subsystems, or daemons.*** 
One example is, the network daemon. A system needed a service to listen for network connections in order to connect those requests to the correct processes. 

Other examples include process schedulers that start processes according to a speciﬁed schedule, 
system error monitoring services, and print servers. 

Typical systems have dozens of daemons. 

In addition, operating systems that run important activities in user context rather than in kernel context may use daemons to run these
activities.

_____



Along with system programs, most operating systems are supplied with programs that are useful in solving common problems or performing common operations. 
Such ***application programs*** include,
Web browsers, word processors and text formatters, spreadsheets, database systems, compilers, plotting and statistical-analysis packages, and games.

The view of the operating system seen by most users is deﬁned by the ***application and system programs, rather than by the actual system calls.***



Next Chapter: [[2.7 Operating-System Structure|2.7 Operating-System Structure]]

Skipped Chapter: 2.6 Operating-System Design and Implementation