



### 2.7.1 Simple Structure

Many operating systems do not have well-deﬁned structures.
Frequently, such systems started as small, simple, and limited systems and then grew beyond their original scope. MS-DOS is an example of such a system.

In MS-DOS, the interfaces and levels of functionality are not well separated.
For instance, application programs are able to access the basic I/O routines to write directly to the display and disk drives. Such freedom leaves MS-DOS vulnerable to errant (or malicious) programs, causing entire system crashes when user programs fail.

[image, MS-DOS layer structure]


Original UNIX OS consists of two separable parts: the kernel and the system programs.

The kernel is further separated into a series of interfaces and device drivers, which have been added and expanded over the years as UNIX has evolved.

The kernel provides the ﬁle system, CPU scheduling, memory management, and other operating-system functions through system calls. 
Taken in sum, that is an enormous amount of functionality to be combined into one level. This monolithic structure was difﬁcult to implement and maintain.
[Traditional UNIX system structure]



### 2.7.2 Layered Approach

With proper hardware support, operating systems can be broken into pieces that are smaller and more appropriate than those allowed by the original MS-DOS and UNIX systems. 

The operating system can then retain much greater control over the computer and over the applications that make use of that computer. 

Implementers have more freedom in changing the inner workings of the system and in creating modular operating systems.


.
.
.
.
.

### 2.7.3 Micro-kernels


### 2.7.4 Modules

Perhaps the best current methodology for operating-system design involves using loadable kernel modules. Here, the kernel has a set of core components and links in additional services via modules, either at boot time or during run time. 
This type of design is common in modern implementations of UNIX, such as Solaris, Linux, and Mac OS X, as well as Windows.


The idea of the design is for the kernel to provide core services while other services are implemented dynamically, as the kernel is running.

Linking services dynamically is preferable to adding new features directly to the kernel, which would require recompiling the kernel every time a change was made.
For example, we might build CPU scheduling and memory management algorithms directly into the kernel and then add support for different ﬁle systems by way of loadable modules.


### 2.7.5 Hybrid System

In practice, very few operating systems adopt a single, strictly deﬁned
structure. 
Instead, they combine different structures, resulting in hybrid systems that address performance, security, and usability issues. 

For example,
both Linux and Solaris are monolithic, because having the operating system in a single address space provides very efﬁcient performance. However, they are also modular, so that new functionality can be dynamically added to the kernel. 

Windows is largely monolithic as well (again primarily for performance reasons), but it retains some behavior typical of microkernel systems, including providing support for separate subsystems (known as operating-system personalities) that run as user-mode processes. 

Windows systems also provide support for dynamically loadable kernel modules.


Structure of three hybrid systems: the Apple Mac OS X operating system and the two most prominent mobile operating systems—iOS and Android.


#### 2.7.5.1 Mac OS X

The Apple Mac OS X operating system uses a hybrid structure.
The top layers include the Aqua user interface and a set of application environments and services.
Notably, the Cocoa environment speciﬁes an API for the Objective-C programming language, which is used for writing Mac OS X applications. 
Below these layers is the kernel environment, which consists primarily of the Mach microkernel and the BSD UNIX kernel. 

Mach provides memory management; support for remote procedure calls (RPCs) and interprocess communication (IPC) facilities, including message passing; and thread scheduling. 

The BSD component provides a BSD command-line interface, support for networking and ﬁle systems, and an implementation of POSIX APIs, including Pthreads.

In addition to Mach and BSD, the kernel environment provides an I/O kit for development of device drivers and dynamically loadable modules (which Mac OS X refers to as kernel extensions). 

The BSD application environment can make use of BSD facilities directly.

[image, The Mac OS X structure]


#### 2.7.5.2 IOS


#### 2.7.5.3 Android



Next Chapter: [[2.10 System Boot|2.10 System Boot]]

___
___

Skipped Chapters

2.8 Operating-System Debugging
2.9 Operating-System Generation

