
## Chapter 14 : Lambda Expressions and Method References

Key Skills & Concepts
●Know the general form of a lambda expression
●Understand the definition of a functional interface
●Use expression lambdas
●Use block lambdas
●Use generic functional interfaces
●Understand variable capture in a lambda expression
●Throw an exception from a lambda expression
●Understand the method reference
●Understand the constructor reference
●Know about the predefined functional interfaces in java.util.function

___


#### Introducing Lambda Expressions

Key to understanding the lambda expression are two constructs. 
The first is the lambda expression,
itself. 

The second is the functional interface.

A lambda expression is, essentially, an anonymous (that is, unnamed) method. However,
this method is not executed on its own. Instead, it is used to implement a method defined by a
functional interface. Thus, a lambda expression results in a form of anonymous class. Lambda
expressions are also commonly referred to as closures.


A functional interface is an interface that contains one and only one abstract method. Thus, a functional interface typically represents a single action.
For example, the standard interface Runnable is
a functional interface because it defines only one method: run( ). Therefore, run( ) defines the action of Runnable. 

Furthermore, a functional interface defines the target type of a lambda expression. 

Here is a key point: a lambda expression can be used only in a context in which a target type is specified. 

A functional interface is sometimes referred to as a
SAM type, where SAM stands for Single Abstract Method.


#### Lambda Expression Fundamentals

operator, sometimes referred to as the lambda operator or the arrow operator, is –>. It divides a lambda expression into two parts. The left side specifies any parameters required by the lambda expression. 
On the right side is the lambda body, which
specifies the actions of the lambda expression.

Lambda body can be single expression or consist of block of code.

___

```java
() -> 98.6;
```
This lambda expression takes no parameters, thus the parameter list is empty. It returns the
constant value 98.6. The return type is inferred to be double. Therefore, it is similar to the
following method:

```java
double myMeth() { return 98.6; }
```
the method defined by a lambda expression does not have a name

___

```java
() -> Math.random() * 100;
```

This lambda expression obtains a pseudo-random value from Math.random( ), multiplies it by
100, and returns the result. It, too, does not require a parameter.

____

When parameter is needed
```java
(n) -> 1.0 / n;
```

This lambda expression returns the reciprocal of the value of parameter n.

Although it is possible to explicitly specify the type of a parameter, often you won’t need to because, in many cases, its type can be inferred.

This returns true or false of type boolean
```java
(n) -> (n % 2)==0;

n -> (n % 2)==0;
```

When a lambda expression has only one parameter,
it is not necessary to surround the parameter name with parentheses when it is specified on
the left side of the lambda operator.



___


#### Functional Interfaces

functional interface is an interface that specifies only one abstract method.

an interface method is abstract only if it is does not specify an implementation

a functional interface can include default, static, or private methods, but in all cases it must have one and only one abstract method. 

Default methods are not abstract. Neither are static or private interface methods. 
Because non-default, non-static, non-private interface methods are implicitly abstract, there is no need to use the abstract modifier (although you can specify it, if you like).

```java
interface MyValue {
	double getValue();
}
```

MyValue is a functional interface, and its function is defined by getValue( ).
because the method getValue( ) is implicitly abstract, and it is the only method defined by
MyValue.

___

a lambda expression can be specified only in a context in which a target type is defined. 

One of these contexts is created when a lambda expression is assigned to a 'functional interface reference'. 

```java
interface MyValue {
	double getValue();
}

// Create a reference to a MyValue instance.
MyValue myVal;

// Use a lambda in an assignment context.
myVal = () -> 98.6;

// lambda expression is assigned to that interface reference

// simplified
MyValue myVal = () -> 98.6;
```

This lambda expression is compatible with getValue( ) because, it has no parameters and returns a double result.

In general, the type of the abstract method defined
by the functional interface and the type of the lambda expression must be compatible. If they
aren’t, a compile-time error will result.


Here, myVal is initialized with the lambda expression.

When a lambda expression occurs in a target type context, an instance of a class is automatically created that implements the functional interface, with the lambda expression defining the behavior of the abstract method declared by the functional interface. 

When that method is called through the target, the lambda expression is executed. Thus, a lambda
expression gives us a way to transform a code segment into an object.

```java
System.out.println("A constant value: " 
			+ myVal.getValue());
```
will return "A constant value: 98.6"

___

obtained when getValue( ) is called.
If the lambda expression takes one or more parameters, then the abstract method in the
functional interface must also take the same number of parameters.

```java
interface MyParamValue
{
	double getValue(double v);
}

MyParamValue myPval = (n) -> 1.0 / n;

System.out.println("Reciprocal of 4 is " 
		+ myPval.getValue(4.0));
```
getValue( ) is implemented by the lambda expression referred to by myPval,
which returns the reciprocal of the argument. In this case, 4.0 is passed to getValue( ), which
returns 0.25.

the type of n is not specified. Rather, its type is inferred from the context. In this case, its type is inferred from the parameter type of getValue( ) as defined by the MyParamValue interface, which is
double. It is also possible to explicitly specify the type of a parameter in a lambda expression.

`(double n) -> 1.0 / n;`

In general, the type and number of the lambda expression’s parameters must be compatible with the method’s parameters and its return type.


___


Other target type contexts include variable initialization, return statements, and method arguments, to name a few.

___


```java
// A functional interface.

interface MyValue
{
	double getValue();
}

interface MyParamValue
{
	double getValue(double v);
}

class LambdaDemo
{
	public static void main(String[] args)
	{
		MyValue myVal = () -> 98.6;
		
		System.out.println("A constant value: " + myVal.getValue());
		
		MyParamValue myPval = (n) -> 1.0/n;
		System.out.println("Reciprocal of 4 is " + myPval.getValue(4.0));
		System.out.println("Reciprocal of 8 is " + myPval.getValue(8.0));
	}
}
```

```
A constant value: 98.6
Reciprocal of 4 is 0.25
Reciprocal of 8 is 0.125
```

___

Not matching the types and parameters
```java
// calling with incompatible return type
myVal = ()-> "three";
// Error! String not compatible with double!

// no parameter
myPval = () -> Math.random(); 
// Error! Parameter required!
```

___

#### What it means is 

The gist is make a class without a body(interface) and atleast one abstract method (functional interface) in it which has the return type and parameters defined but no functionality.

The lambda expression which has no name but just a parameter and action (which acts as body and variable assignment) is assigned to an instance of the interface.... so essentially making it into an instance of a class (object) so now it can be used as any class and method by passing the parameters of suitable type and the output of the expression should match the output type.

It is making an object out of an interface without defining and writing one more concrete object. a by pass to get the class object and adding a body to it.


___

```java

/* A functional interface that takes two int parameters 
and returns a boolean result. */

interface NumericTest {
	boolean test(int n, int m);
}

class LambdaDemo2
{
	public static void main(String[] args)
	{
	
		NumericTest isFactor = (n, d) -> (n % d) == 0;
		// lambda expression to find is d is factor of n
	
		if( isFactor.test(10, 2) )
			System.out.println("2 is a factor of 10");
			
		if(!isFactor.test(10, 3))
			System.out.println("3 is not a factor of 10");
		System.out.println();
	
	
	/* Using same functional interface to find small
	and large by changing the expression for
	another instance*/
	
		NumericTest lessThan = (n, m) -> (n < m);
		//calling test()
		if(lessThan.test(2, 10))
			System.out.println("2 is less than 10");
			
		if(!lessThan.test(10, 2))
			System.out.println("10 is not less than 2");
		System.out.println();
	
	
	/* lambda expression to return true if the
	absolute value are equal */
	
		NumericTest absEqual = (n, m) -> (n < 0 ? -n : n) == (m < 0 ? -m : m);
		
		if(absEqual.test(4, -4))
			System.out.println("Absolute values of 4 and -4 are equal.");
			
		if(!lessThan.test(4, -5))
			System.out.println("Absolute values of 4 and -5 are not equal.");
		System.out.println();
	}
}
```

```
2 is a factor of 10
3 is not a factor of 10

2 is less than 10
10 is not less than 2

Absolute values of 4 and -4 are equal.
Absolute values of 4 and -5 are not equal.
```

using different reference variables called isFactor, lessThan, and absEqual,
as the original program does, makes it very clear to which lambda expression each variable
refers.

there is no need to use three separate NumericTest reference variables because the same one could have been used for all three tests by re assigning the lambda expression.
```java
NumericTest myTest;

myTest = (n, d) -> (n % d) == 0;

myTest = (n, m) -> (n < m);

myTest = (n, m) -> (n < 0 ? -n : n) == (m < 0 ? -m : m);
```


Similar input using string can also be made
```java
interface StringTest {
	boolean test(String aStr, String bStr);
}

class LambdaDemo3 
{
	public static void main(String[] args)
	{
/* This lambda expression determines if one string is part of another. */
		StringTest isIn = (a, b) -> a.indexOf(b) != -1;

		String str = "This is a test";
		System.out.println("Testing string: " + str);
		
		if(isIn.test(str, "is a"))
			System.out.println("'is a' found.");
		else
			System.out.println("'is a' not found.");
			
			
		if(isIn.test(str, "xyz"))
			System.out.println("'xyz' Found");
		else
			System.out.println("'xyz' not found");
	}
}
```

```
Testing string: This is a test
'is a' found.
'xyz' not found
```

the lambda expression uses the indexOf( ) method defined by the String class
to determine if one string is part of another.

____


#### Block Lambda Expressions

