
## Chapter 15 : Modules


Key Skills & Concepts
●Know the definition of a module
●Know Java’s module-related keywords
●Declare a module by use of the module keyword
●Use requires and exports
●Understand the purpose of module-info.java
●Use javac and java to compile and run module-based programs
●Understand the purpose of java.base
●Understand how pre-module legacy code is supported
●Export a package to a specific module
●Use implied readability
●Use services in a module


Modules give you a way to describe the relationships and dependencies of the code that comprises an application. Modules also let you control which parts of a module are accessible to other modules and which are not. Through the use of modules you can create more reliable, scalable programs.

As a general rule, modules are most helpful to large applications because they help reduce the management complexity often associated with a large software system. 

However, small programs also benefit from modules because the Java API library has now been organized into modules. Thus, it is now possible to specify which parts of the API are required by your
program and which are not. This makes it possible to deploy programs with a smaller run-time footprint, which is especially important when creating code for small devices, such as those
intended to be part of the Internet of Things (IoT).


____

#### Module Basics

In its most fundamental sense, a module is a grouping of packages and resources that can be collectively referred to by the module’s name. 

A module declaration specifies the name of a module and defines the relationship a module and its packages have to other modules. 

Module declarations are program statements in a Java source file and are supported by several module-related keywords added to Java by JDK 9. They are shown here:

```
exports   module   open   opens
provides  requires  to   transitive
uses      with
```

It is important to understand that these keywords are recognized as keywords only in the context of a module declaration. Otherwise, they are interpreted as identifiers in other situations.


A module declaration is contained in a file called module-info.java. Thus, a module is defined in a Java source file. This file is then compiled by javac into a class file and is known as a module descriptor. The module-info.java file must contain only a module definition. It is not a general-purpose file.


A module declaration begins with the keyword module. Here is its general form:
```java
module moduleName {
	// module definition
}
```
The name of the module is specified by moduleName, which must be a valid Java identifier or a sequence of identifiers separated by periods. The module definition is specified within the braces.

Although a module definition may be empty (which results in a declaration that simply names the
module), typically it specifies one or more clauses that define the characteristics of the module.


At the foundation of a module’s capabilities are two key features. 

The first is a module’s ability to specify that it requires another module. In other words, one module can specify that it depends on another. A dependence relationship is specified by use of a `requires` statement. 

By default, the presence of the required module is checked at both compile time and run time. 

The second key feature is a module’s ability to control which, if any, of its packages are accessible by another module. This is accomplished by use of the `exports` keyword. 

The public and protected types within a package are accessible to other modules only if they are explicitly exported.




#### A Closer Look at requires and exports


#### java.base and the Platform Modules



#### Legacy Code and the Unnamed Module



#### Exporting to a Specific Module



#### Using requires transitive



#### Use Services

Service and Service Provider Basics

The Service-Based Keywords

A Module-Based Service Example

Additional Module Features


