## Bindings and Scopes

Part of the program in which a binding is visible is called it's scope.

***Local Variables***
are declared inside a function code block `{}` is only visible inside the function.
`Local bindings` are those that can be accessed only within the defined function parameters. a new instances of these bindings are created each time the function is called.
```js
function showMessage() {
	let message = "Hello JS";
	alert (message);
}

showMessage();  // Hello JS
alert (message);  // Error
```

within `if, for, while` so on, the bindings that are created in `{..}` using `let and const` are local to the block of the loop in which they are declared in. No other code before or after it can see it.

(bindings made with `var` are visible in a function and also outside the function if it doesn't exist outside )


***Outer Variables***
A function can access an outer variable as well.
A function has full access to outer variable so it can modify it as well.
```js
let userName = 'John';

function showMessage() {
	let message = "Hello, " + userName;
	alert(message);
}
showMessage();  // Hello, John
```

```js
let userName = 'John';

function showMessage() {
	userName = "Bob";   // value over written when function runs

	let message = "Hello, " + userName;
	alert(message);
}
alert( userName); // John   brfore function call
showMessage();  // Hello, Bob
alert( userName); // Bob   overwritten
```
The outer variable is used only if there is no local one.
If same named variable is declared in the function then it shadows the outer one.

```js
let userName = 'John';

function showMessage() {
	let userName = "Bob";   // declared a local variable

	let message = "Hello, " + userName;
	alert(message);
}
alert( userName); // John
showMessage();  // Hello, Bob
alert( userName); // John
```

***Nested Scope***
Blocks and functions can be created inside other blocks and functions, producing multiple degrees of locality.

```js
const hummus = function(factor) {

	const ingredient = function(amount, unit, name) {
		let ingredientAmount = amount * factor;
		if (ingredientAmount > 1) {
			unit += "s"; 
		}
		console.log( '${ingredientAmount} ${unit} ${name}');
	};
	ingredient(1, "can", "Chickpeas");
	ingredient(0.25, "cup", "tahini");
	ingredient(0.25, "cup", "Lemon Juice");
};
```
The inner function can see the bindings of outer function, but outer function cannot access the inner functions bindings.
Each local scope can see all the local scopes that contain it, and all scopes can see the global scope. This approach to binding visibility is called `lexical scoping`.

***Making a counter***
```js
function makeCounter() {
	let count = 0;

	return function() {
		return count++;
		};
}

let count = makeCunter();

alert( count() ); // 0
alert( count() ); // 1
alert( count() ); // 2
```
Despite being simple, slightly modified variants of that code have practical uses, for instance, as a [random number generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator) to generate random values for automated tests.



***Global Variables / Global Object***

`Global bindings` are those defined outside of a function, block or module. Their scope is the whole program.
Variable declared outside any function are called global so they are visible from any function (unless shadowed by locals).

It is good practice to minimize the use of global variables. Most variables reside in the functions.

In a browser it is named `window`, for Node.js it is `global`, for other environments it may have another name.

Recently, `globalThis` was added to the language, as a standardized name for a global object, that should be supported across all environments. It’s supported in all major browsers.

We’ll use `window` here, assuming that our environment is a browser. If your script may run in other environments, it’s better to use `globalThis` instead.