
Installing VitePress

```bash
npm add -D vitepress
```

Setup Wizard
```bash
npx vitepress init
```

The config file (`.vitepress/config.js`) allows you to customize various aspects of your VitePress site.


You can also configure the behavior of the theme via the `themeConfig` option. Consult the [Config Reference](https://vitepress.dev/reference/site-config) for full details on all config options.

___

Markdown files outside the `.vitepress` directory are considered **source files**.

```bash
npm run docs:dev

# direct methos
npx vitepress dev docs
```

[CLI Reference](https://vitepress.dev/reference/cli).

```bash
npm run docs:build

npm run docs:preview
```

The `preview` command will boot up a local static web server that will serve the output directory `.vitepress/dist` at `http://localhost:4173`.

You can use this to make sure everything looks good before pushing to production.

___

### Routing

Project root is `.vitepress` special directory reserved for config files, dev server cache, build output and theme customization code.

If your VitePress project is located in `./docs`, you should run `vitepress dev docs`


Source Directory is where Markdown source files live, it is the same as the project root. However, you can configure it via the [`srcDir`](https://vitepress.dev/reference/site-config#srcdir) config option.


#### Linking Between Pages

You can use both absolute and relative paths when linking between pages. Note that although both `.md` and `.html` extensions will work, the best practice is to omit file extensions so that VitePress can generate the final URLs based on your config.

```bash
<!-- Do -->
[Getting Started](./getting-started)
[Getting Started](../guide/getting-started)

<!-- Don't -->
[Getting Started](./getting-started.md)
[Getting Started](./getting-started.html)
```

[Asset Handling](https://vitepress.dev/guide/asset-handling).


___

If you want to link to a page in your site that is not generated by VitePress, you'll either need to use the full URL (opens in a new tab) or explicitly specify the target:

There was an issue while loading static pages(extra HTML) to load since no proper root was present as it was not generated by Vite, so Absolute link works instead of relative link.

```
[Link to pure.html](/pure.html){target="_self"}
```

___

#### Route Rewrites


```
.
└─ packages
   ├─ pkg-a
   │  └─ src
   │     ├─ foo.md
   │     └─ index.md
   └─ pkg-b
      └─ src
         ├─ bar.md
         └─ index.md
```

And you want the VitePress pages to be generated like this:

```
packages/pkg-a/src/index.md  -->  /pkg-a/index.html
packages/pkg-a/src/foo.md    -->  /pkg-a/foo.html
packages/pkg-b/src/index.md  -->  /pkg-b/index.html
packages/pkg-b/src/bar.md    -->  /pkg-b/bar.html
```

You can achieve this by configuring the [`rewrites`](https://vitepress.dev/reference/site-config#rewrites) option like this:

`.vitepress/config.js`

```
export default {
  rewrites: {
    'packages/pkg-a/src/index.md': 'pkg-a/index.md',
    'packages/pkg-a/src/foo.md': 'pkg-a/foo.md',
    'packages/pkg-b/src/index.md': 'pkg-b/index.md',
    'packages/pkg-b/src/bar.md': 'pkg-b/bar.md'
  }
}
```

The `rewrites` option also supports dynamic route parameters. In the above example, it would be verbose to list all the paths if you have many packages. Given that they all have the same file structure, you can simplify the config like this:

```
export default {
  rewrites: {
    'packages/:pkg/src/:slug*': ':pkg/:slug*'
  }
}
```

The rewrite paths are compiled using the `path-to-regexp` package - consult [its documentation](https://github.com/pillarjs/path-to-regexp/tree/6.x#parameters) for more advanced syntax.

____

### Accessing Params in Page

You can use the params to pass additional data to each page. The Markdown route file can access the current page params in Vue expressions via the `$params` global property:

```
- package name: {{ $params.pkg }}
- version: {{ $params.version }}
```

You can also access the current page's params via the [`useData`](https://vitepress.dev/reference/runtime-api#usedata) runtime API. This is available in both Markdown files and Vue components:

```
<script setup>
import { useData } from 'vitepress'

// params is a Vue ref
const { params } = useData()

console.log(params.value)
</script>
```


### Rendering Raw Content

Params passed to the page will be serialized in the client JavaScript payload, so you should avoid passing heavy data in params, for example raw Markdown or HTML content fetched from a remote CMS.

Instead, you can pass such content to each page using the `content` property on each path object:

```
export default {
  async paths() {
    const posts = await (await fetch('https://my-cms.com/blog-posts')).json()

    return posts.map((post) => {
      return {
        params: { id: post.id },
        content: post.content // raw Markdown or HTML
      }
    })
  }
}
```

Then, use the following special syntax to render the content as part of the Markdown file itself:

```
<!-- @content -->
```


