
## Hooks

there are 15 built-in hooks in React (as of React 18)

* Stateful hooks—These functions are concerned with making components and applications stateful on several different layers and levels of complexity: 
```js
useState, 
useReducer, 
useRef, 
useContext, 
useDeferredValue, and 
useTransition
```

* Effect hooks—These functions are concerned with running effects inside a component at different stages of the overall component life cycle as well as during each individual render cycle: `useEffect and useLayoutEffect`.

* Memoization hooks—These functions are used for performance optimization by avoiding recalculating values if their constituent parts haven’t changed: `useMemo, useCallback, useId`.

* Library hooks—These advanced functions are almost exclusively used in larger component libraries that are created to be shared either with the community or internally in a larger organization. 

```js
useDebugValue, 
useImperativeHandle, 
useInsertionEffect, and useSyncExternalStore.
```

___

### Stateful Components

An application without state is completely static. The application will be identical for the entire time you have it open in the browser, and it will be identical for every user using the application. If you need login, sessions, interaction, and variability and changes over time, you need your application to be stateful.

stateful components aren’t all the same, just like not all states are the same.

___

#### Simple state values with useState

useState is the bread and butter of stateful applications.

The state is relavent inside the component.


#### Creating complex state with useReducer

`interdependent` state. The individual values in the state depend on each other, and you’ll often be updating multiple values at the same time.
`useReducer` is a stateful hook for exactly this purpose. It’s an advanced version of `useState` where we can alter our state in a more complex and controlled way.

Imagine that we have a loader component, where we want to know whether loading succeeded or failed, what the error message is in case of failure, and what the data is in case of success. The value of the error message is only relevant if the loading fails. If loading succeeds, the error message is completely irrelevant and shouldn’t even be set—and vice versa for the result data.

`useReducer` is never strictly necessary—anything we can do with a reducer can also be done with a combination of simpler `useStates`.

Using a reducer is a way to generate a new state (“reduce”) solely based on the current state and some action that takes some payload.


#### Remembering a value without re-rendering with useRef

useRef is both one of the simplest hooks in React and also one of the least understood hooks. It’s a hook with a passive state, which means the hook can contain state, but setting or updating the state doesn’t cause a re-render.

useRef is used for a number of purposes, including remembering values between renders and serving as a reference to DOM elements used in the render. The latter is a very important use case (and the reason for the name, useRef), as it’s the best and simplest way to address DOM elements through script in your components.

___

Imagine that we want to create a button that only works on double-clicking within a certain number of milliseconds. To create this, we need to remember how much time has passed between successive clicks. The button doesn’t change when we click the first time. We just need to remember a value inside a component instance for some amount of time, but we won’t use the value to determine the output of the
component.

___

We need to store the time of the last click event somewhere in our component, and it needs to be in a place that persists between renders.

We already know that we can store such a value in a state provided by the useState hook.

```jsx
import { useState } from 'react';

const THRESHOLD = 300;

function DoubleClickCounter()
{
	const [counter, setCounter] = useState(0);
	const [lastClickTime, setLastClickTime] = useState(null);
	
	const onClick = () => {
		const isDoubleClick = 
			Date.now() - lastClickTime < THRESHOLD;
		
		if(isDoubleClick) {
			setCounter( (val) => val+1 );	
		}
		else{
			setLastClickTime( Date.now());
		}
	};

	return (
		<main>
			<p>Counter: {counter}</p>
			<button onClick={onClick}>Increment</button>
		</main>
	);
}
function App() {
	return <DoubleClickCounter />
}
export default App;
```

The function returns a counter component with the counter value.
The value is updated only if the two consecutive clicks are below the defined threshold.

Two `useState` hooks maintain the state of the counter and the last click time.

if the last click time and current time less than threshold, increment counter otherwise set the current time as value of last clicked time.

A DoubleClick flag is used to hold the flag set using conditional.

___

This isn’t necessary, however, and will cause needless extra re-renders. When we call setLastClickTime in each click, React will re-render the component because a state value changes. However, the JSX won’t change in the component, and the same DOM output will be rendered to the screen.

___

We only need the state value internally in the component and don’t need the component to re-render just because the value is updated, we can instead use a reference via the useRef hook.

```jsx
import { useState, useRef } from 'react';

const THRESHOLD = 300;

function DoubleClickCounter()
{
	const [counter, setCounter] = useState(0);
	const lastClickTime = useRef(null);
	
	const onClick = () => {
		const isDoubleClick = 
			Date.now() - lastClickTime.current < THRESHOLD;
		
		if(isDoubleClick) {
			setCounter( (val) => val+1 );	
		}
		else{
			lastClickTime.current = Date.now() ;
		}
	};

	return (
		<main>
			<p>Counter: {counter}</p>
			<button onClick={onClick}>Increment</button>
		</main>
	);
}
function App() {
	return <DoubleClickCounter />
}
export default App;
```

To instantiate a useRef hook, you simply call the hook and store it in a variable (there is no setter function). You can optionally pass an initial value to the hook as well.

To read or update the current value of a useRef hook, you access the `.current` property on the hook return value.


____

#### Reference to DOM Elements

We use `useRef` to have a reference to the actual DOM element that is rendered in the document as a consequence of the JSX element that we’ve created.

```jsx
function Component()
{
	const ref = useRef();
	return <div ref={ref} />;
}
```

“Assigns” the reference to the DOM node, which, when the component is rendered, assigns a reference to the DOM node inside the ref object.

This doesn’t use the reference for anything, but merely creates it.

Autofocus on an input field when it is mounted
```jsx
function AutoFocusInput()
{
	const ref = useRef();
	useEffect( () => ref.current.focus(), [] );
{/*effect that runs on mount only, empty dependency array*/}
	return <input ref={ref} />;
}

{/* ref.current used to get the value in reference*/}
```

This latter use of useRef is the more common use (and the originally intended purpose)

___

#### Easier multicomponent state with useContext

it’s one of the more powerful hooks when it comes to building good architecture. rather
than load and update values in a local store, useContext works in a store in a parent component somewhere up the compund tree.

This is th ehook version of the react context API.


#### Low-priority state updates with useDeferredValue and useTransition

This topic is both fairly advanced and also brand new. These are features only just added with React 18,(2022)

When a user clicks this button, it should react instantly. What if we could inform React that updating the button state is high priority and should happen right away, whereas highlighting all the spelling errors in the document is lower priority, and we don’t mind if that trails.

The useDeferredValue and useTransition hooks are two different ways to specify low-priority state updates from two different angles.

refer to the following online materials for more information:
* Article: http://mng.bz/jPAP
* Video: http://mng.bz/WzM1


___

## Component effects

Component effects are a group of hooks dedicated to running side effects from within hooks with three different purposes:
* To influence the outside based on the component state
* To update the component state based on something from the outside
* To both influence the outside and update the component state at the same time

`useEffect` and `useLayoutEffect`. There is only one more such hook, `useInsertionEffect`, but it’s
reserved for advanced use by specific libraries, so it’s not recommended to be used by
“regular” developers.


___

.
.
.
.
.

___
