### Functional Components

React was based on class-based components for a long time in the early years, but an alternative came along for the simplest of components at some point. 

Functional components are a more succinct and, in some regards, simpler way of writing React components, and they now have the same feature set as their class-based cousins.

The functional part refers to the component definition itself being a JavaScript function rather than a JavaScript class.


when React hooks came about in React 16.8, functional components were more powerful and now primary method recommended by the React team.

Class-based components are still fully supported in React and probably not going anywhere anytime soon. :
* Not all older codebases have been refactored away from class-based components and must still be maintained. 
* Some older libraries still only document how they interface with class-based components and thus require your code to use them to interface with the library correctly.
* Some long-time React developers started using class-based components and feel more comfortable with them, so they prefer to stick to them when possible.
* The mental model of a component life cycle changed quite a bit when going from class-based to functional components, and, in some instances, the re-render life cycle can be easier to maintain when using the old class-based approach.
* A tiny subset of the core functionality in React is only possible using class-based components (error boundary, in particular).

___

#### Short way to write React Components

These utilities are all about simplifying how you write and interact with components:
* Simplifying access to properties using destructuring
* Simplifying the component interface with default values
* Simplifying the component interface using pass-through properties

these utilities will give you a good foundation to write simple, presentational React components using concise component definitions.

___

### A menu

a simple React application: a menu with a list of links all built with plain HTML. This is a very simple HTML fragment with a website menu.

#### Implementation using classes

Three components `<App />, <Menu />, <MenuItem/>`

```jsx
import { Component } from 'react';
import "./App.css";

class App extends Component
{
	render()
	{
		return (
			<main>
				<Menu />  
		{/*Instance of another component without properties*/}
			</main>
		);
	}
}

class Menu extends Component
{
	render()
	{
		return(
			<nav className="navbar">
				<h1 classname="title">TheMenuCompany</h1>
				<ul className="menu">
					<MenuItem label="Home" href="/" />
					<MenuItem label="About" href="/about/" />
					<MenuItem label="Blog" href="/blog/" />
				</ul>
			</nav>
		);
	}
}

class MenuItem extends Component
{
	render()
	{
		return(
			<li className="menu-item">
				<a
					className="menu-link"
					href={this.props.href}
				>{this.props.label}</a>
			</li>
		);
	}
}

export default App;
```

we can nest components, use both built-in HTML components and our own custom components, pass properties to child components, and access properties passed to our custom components.

#### Implementation using Functions

```jsx
import "./App.css"

function App()
{
	return (
		<main>
			<Menu />
		</main>
	);
}

function Menu()
{
	return(
		return(
			<nav className="navbar">
				<h1 classname="title">TheMenuCompany</h1>
				<ul className="menu">
					<MenuItem label="Home" href="/" />
					<MenuItem label="About" href="/about/" />
					<MenuItem label="Blog" href="/blog/" />
				</ul>
			</nav>
		);
	)
}

function MenuItem(props) {/*Takes single argument*/}
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" href={props.href}>
			{props.label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}

export default App;
```

To create a functional component, we simply create a function and return JavaScript XML (JSX)—that’s it.


If we need to access properties passed to the component, we can do that through the single argument passed to the function, which is a frozen object of properties. This works similarly to `this.props` in a class-based component.


___

Any value that can be executed as a function, that returns JSX, can be used as a component. 

```jsx
const App = function()
{
	const EmptyMenu = () => { return <nav />};
	
	return (
		<main>
			<EmptyMenu />
		</main>
	);
}
```
A functional expression and arrow function are also components as they are returning an JSX object.

___

### Destructuring properties

we received our properties in the functional component as a `props` object and accessed the properties on the object later using, `props.label`.

A more common approach used by many React developers is to destructure the properties directly in the function signature. Destructuring is the process of extracting parts of a complex value in a compact way.

```js
const someObject = { a:1, b:2, c:3 };

const {a, b} = someObject;
// destructures object into 'a' and 'b'
// c is ignored
```

We can use destructuring when accepting object arguments to a function:
```js
function log( {message, level} )
{
	console.log(level.toUpperCase(), "Message: ", message);
	
	log( {message:"Unkown product", level: "error" });
}
```

```
ERROR Message: Unkown product
```

It can be made into two separate arguments like `log(message, level)` but as functions get more complex and more arguments are added it is easier to call the function with one argument (variable number of arguments).


In a functional React component, properties are always given as the first (and only) argument to our defining functions. We can use the method of destructuring the argument object to make the component definition even cleaner in the next listing.

```jsx
function MenuItem( {href, label} ) {/*Destructure arguments*/}
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" href={href}>
			{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
// no need of calling props object as props.label
```

Destructuring can be done inside the function also
```jsx
function MenuItem(props) {/*Takes single argument*/}
{
	const { href, label } = props;
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" href={href}>
			{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
```


however, it’s merely a convention; other variants are also possible.

___


#### Default values

An added benefit of using destructured properties is that we can also introduce default values.

To open menu link in new tab but others in same tab.
```jsx
import "./App.css"

function App()
{
	return (
		<main>
			<Menu />
		</main>
	);
}

function Menu()
{
	return(
		return(
			<nav className="navbar">
				<h1 classname="title">TheMenuCompany</h1>
				<ul className="menu">
					<MenuItem label="Home" href="/" target="_self" />
					<MenuItem label="About" href="/about/" target="_self" />
					<MenuItem label="Blog" href="/blog/" target="_blank" />
	{/* new target property added*/}
				</ul>
			</nav>
		);
	)
}

function MenuItem( {label, href, target} )
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" 
			href={href}
			target={target}
			>{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
export default App;
```

We can leave out the default `_self` from the two items since `target="_self"` is a default of `a` tag so no need to override it by defining target in component.

If we want a default argument even if not specifically called for, then destructuring allows to define default.

```jsx
function Menu()
{
	return(
		return(
			<nav className="navbar">
				<h1 classname="title">TheMenuCompany</h1>
				<ul className="menu">
					<MenuItem label="Home" href="/" />
					<MenuItem label="About" href="/about/" />
					<MenuItem label="Blog" href="/blog/" target="_blank" />
				</ul>
			</nav>
		);
	)
}


function MenuItem( {label, href, target="_self"} )
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" 
			href={href}
			target={target}
			>{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
```

___

You can specify your component properties in any order you like. Although common JavaScript practice is to specify properties with defaults at the end of the definition, nothing prevents you from doing it differently.

___

### Pass-through properties

Adding ID to About and Blog and default Id in function declaration.
```jsx
function Menu()
{
	return(
		return(
			<nav className="navbar">
				<h1 classname="title">TheMenuCompany</h1>
				<ul className="menu">
					<MenuItem label="Home" href="/" />
					<MenuItem label="About" href="/about/" id="about-link" />
					<MenuItem label="Blog" href="/blog/" target="_blank" id="blog-link" />
				</ul>
			</nav>
		);
	)
}

function MenuItem( {label, href, target="_self", id=null} )
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" 
			href={href}
			target={target}
			id={id}
			>{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
```

This is beginning to look a bit repetitive. We’re accepting a bunch of arguments only to pass them straight through to a single element—even with the same name and everything else intact.

##### Rest syntax

You can indicate that you want some arguments to be handled in a special way and all other arguments to be passed straight through to the target element.

When destructuring an object, you can use the rest syntax, denoted by three periods, to specify an object that will be assigned all the leftover properties not already assigned.

```js
const someObj = { a:1, b:2, c:3, d:4 };

const { a, b, ...otherAtt } = someObj

// this will result in
const a = 1;
const b = 2
const otherAttrs = { c: 3, d: 4 };
```

to assign properties to a JSX element from an object, but to reiterate, we do this using the spread operator inside the component:

```jsx
const extraProp = { target="_blank", id="link" };

return <a href="/blog/" {...extraProp} />;
```
wrap the spread inside brackets, or it won’t work.

___

```jsx
// using rest and spread operator

function MenuItem( {label, href, ...rest} )
{
	return (
		<li className="menu-item">
			<a className="menu-link" 
			href={href} {...rest}
			>{label}
			</a>
		</li>
	);
}
```

the common ordering is as follows:
* Properties without defaults
* Properties with defaults
* Rest

`function MenuItem({ label, href, target="_self", ...rest }) {`

___

### A comparison of component types


At this stage in your React edification, the differences between functional components and class-based components might seem small or even insignificant.

```jsx
class Menu extends Component 
{
	render() 
	{
		return <nav />;
	}
}

function Menu() 
{
	return <nav />;
}
```

When using callbacks and state, things get more complicated, and the differences between functional components and their class-based siblings become larger and larger. 

When we get to the composition of components and reuse of generalized functionality, very different patterns emerge in the two worlds—almost completely different.

You’ll probably be using functional components unless there’s a strong reason not to for your particular project or development team.

___

#### Benefits of functional components

* Compactness
* Readability
* Purity of function can be easy to detarmine (no ideeffect)
* Simple
* Testability with independent hooks

All are Mostly developer convenience

#### Disadvantages

There are no direct disadvantages to using functional components. For any feature that you can create in both a functional component and a class-based component, there are never any disadvantages to creating said feature in a functional one.


___

An error boundary is a way of establishing a fallback in case a child component throws a JavaScript error. You should always strive to never have unhandled errors, of course, but as things get complex, input changes, APIs evolve, and your codebase gets more complex and harder to properly cover by tests, errors will occur. An error boundary is your way of making sure that when such an error does occur, at least the end user is presented with a nicely formatted error message.

___
