
## `document.getElementById`

If an element has the `id` attribute, we can get the element using the method `document.getElementById(id)`, no matter where it is.
```html
<script>
	let elem = document.getElementById('elem');

	elem.style.background = "red";
</script>
```
The method `getElementById` can be called on `document` object. It looks for the given `id` in the whole document.


# `querySelectorAll`

By far, the most versatile method, `elem.querySelectorAll(css)` returns all elements inside `elem` matching the given CSS selector.
```html
<ul>
	<li>The</li>
	<li>test</li>
</ul>

<ul>
	<li>has</li>
	<li>passed</li>
</ul>

<script>
	let elements = document.querySelectorAll('ul > li:last-child');

	for (let elem of elements) {
		alert(elem.innerHTML);    // test, passed
		}
</script>
```
Pseudo-classes in the CSS selector like `:hover` and `:active` are also supported. For instance, `document.querySelectorAll(':hover')` will return the collection with elements that the pointer is over now (in nesting order: from the outermost `<html>` to the most nested one).


# `querySelector`

`elem.querySelector(css)` returns the first element for the given CSS selector.

The result is the same as `elem.querySelectorAll(css)[0]`, but the latter is looking for _all_ elements and picking one, while `elem.querySelector` just looks for one. So it’s faster and also shorter to write.


`elem.matches`
The [elem.matches(css)](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-matches) does not look for anything, it merely checks if `elem` matches the given CSS-selector. It returns `true` or `false`.



___________________

# elements `/ tags`

"element" nodes are primarily used for manipulating the DOM
```html
<div id = "container">
	<div class = "display"> </div>
	<div class = "controls"> </div>	
</div>
```
Here there is a parent and its children which are on the next level, each on their own branch.

## Targeting nodes with selectors

When working with DOM, 'selectors' are used to target the nodes to be worked on.
Using CSS style selectors to target the `<div class = "display"> </div>`:
```css
/* CSS selectors */
.display
div.display
#container > .display
div#container > div.display
```

Using relational selectors (i.e `firstElementChild` or `lastElementChild`) with special properties owned by the nodes.
Identifying a certain node based on its relationship to the nodes around it. 
```js
// selects the #container div
const container = document.querySelector("#container");

// selects the first child of #container  i.e .display
console.dir(container.firstElementChild);

// selects the .controls div
const controls = document.querrySelector(".controls");

// selects the prior sibling of control i.e .display
console.dir(controls.previousElementSibling);
```


______________


## `innerHTML`

The [innerHTML](https://w3c.github.io/DOM-Parsing/#the-innerhtml-mixin) property allows to get the HTML inside the element as a string.
We can also modify it. So it’s one of the most powerful ways to change the page.
```html
<script>
	alert( documnet.body.innerHTML ); // read current content
	document.body.innerHTML = 'The new body';  // replace it
</script>
```
We can append HTML to an element by using `elem.innerHTML += "more html"`
what’s going on is _not_ an addition, but a full overwrite.
In other words, `innerHTML+=` does this:
1. The old contents is removed.
2. The new `innerHTML` is written instead (a concatenation of the old and the new one).

**As the content is “zeroed-out” and rewritten from the scratch, all images and other resources will be reloaded**.

# `outerHTML`

The `outerHTML` property contains the full HTML of the element. That’s like `innerHTML` plus the element itself.
```html
<script>
	alert( elem.outerHTML ); // <div id='elem'> Hello </div>
</script>
```

**writing to `outerHTML` does not change the element. Instead, it replaces it in the DOM.**

The `outerHTML` assignment does not modify the DOM element , but removes it from the DOM and inserts the new HTML in its place.
So what happened in `div.outerHTML=...` is:
- `div` was removed from the document.
- Another piece of HTML `<p>A new element</p>` was inserted in its place.
- `div` still has its old value. The new HTML wasn’t saved to any variable.

It’s so easy to make an error here: modify `div.outerHTML` and then continue to work with `div` as if it had the new content in it. But it doesn’t. Such thing is correct for `innerHTML`, but not for `outerHTML`.


# `textContent`

The `textContent` provides access to the _text_ inside the element: only text, minus all `<tags>`

**Writing to `textContent` is much more useful, because it allows to write text the “safe way”.**

An arbitrary string, for instance entered by a user, and want to show it.
- With `innerHTML` we’ll have it inserted “as HTML”, with all HTML tags.
- With `textContent` we’ll have it inserted “as text”, all symbols are treated literally.

```html
<div id = "elem1" ></div>
<div id = "elem2" ></div>

<script>
	let name = prompt("What's your name?", "<b>Winnie-the-Pooh!</b>");

	elem1.innerHTML = name;
	emel2.textContent = name;
</script>
```

1. The first `<div>` gets the name “as HTML”: all tags become tags, so we see the bold name.
2. The second `<div>` gets the name “as text”, so we literally see `<b>Winnie-the-Pooh!</b>`.

In most cases, we expect the text from a user, and want to treat it as text. We don’t want unexpected HTML in our site. An assignment to `textContent` does exactly that.



# the hidden property

The “hidden” attribute and the DOM property specifies whether the element is visible or not.

```html
<div> Both divs below are hidden </div>

<div hidden>wit the attribute "hidden"</div>

<div id="elem">Javascript assigned property hidden</div>

<script>
	elem.hidden = true;
</script>
```
`hidden` works the same as `style="display:none"`. But it’s shorter to write.

Here’s a blinking element:
```html
<div id="elem">A blinking element</div>

<script>
	setInterval( () => elem.hidden = !elem.hidden, 1000);
</script>
```



# More properties
DOM elements also have additional properties, in particular those that depend on the class:

- `value` – the value for `<input>`, `<select>` and `<textarea>` (`HTMLInputElement`, `HTMLSelectElement`…).
- `href` – the “href” for `<a href="...">` (`HTMLAnchorElement`).
- `id` – the value of “id” attribute, for all elements (`HTMLElement`).
```html
<input type="text" id="elem" value="value">

<script>
	alert( elem.type);   // text
	alert( elem.id);  // elem
	alert( elem.value);  // value
</script>
```










