
One of the fundamental differences of objects versus primitives is that objects are stored and copied “by reference”, 

whereas primitive values: strings, numbers, boolean, etc – are always copied “as a whole value”.
```js
let message = "hello";
let phrase = message;
// both storing the different strings.
```


**A variable assigned to an object stores not the object itself, but its “address in memory” – in other words “a reference” to it.**
We may think of an object variable, such as `user`, like a sheet of paper with the address of the object on it.

**When an object variable is copied, the reference is copied, but the object itself is not duplicated.**

```js
let user = { name: "John" };

let admin = user;  // copies reference to object
// both variables point to same object
```
We can use either variable to access the object and modify its contents:

```js
admin.name = "Pete";
// changed by admin reference

alert(user.name); 
// "Pete"   change seen in user reference
```


#### Comparison by reference

The two objects are equal only if they are the same object.

There is a difference between having two references to the same object and having two different objects that contain the same properties.
```js
let object1 = {value: 10};
let object2 = {value: 10};
let object3 = object1;

console.log( object1 == object2 );  // false
console.log( object1 == object3 ); // true
```

#### Reassigning Object data type Variables

While mutating the ***object*** we have a reference to, will ***affect*** all other variables that reference it.
Reassigning a ***variable*** that was pointing to an object won't affect what the other variables refer to.
```js
let animal = { species: "dog" };
let dog = animal;

animal = { species: "cat" };
// reassigning animal variable with a completely new object

console.log(animal); // { species: "cat" }
console.log(dog);   // { species: "dog" }   the previous reference didn't change
```

___

### [[4_for...in_loop|for..in loop]]


## Cloning and merging

We can create a new object and replicate the structure of existing one by iterating over its properties and copying them on primitive level.

```js
let user = {
	name: "John",
	age: 30
};

let copy = {};

for (let prop in user) {
	copy[prop] = user[prop];
}

copy.name = "Pete";
alert( user.name ); // John,  change is not affected
```
If the properties are not just primitives, but objects, then doing a copy like this will copy the reference to that object but not the object. It ends up pointing to the same object, not a new copy of that property.
This nested copy cannot be not be done properly with `Object.assign` also.

#### `Object.assign`

It copies the properties of all source objects into the target `dest` and returns it as the result. makes a "shallow copy".
```js
Object.assign(dest, ...sources)
```
`dest` is the target object
further arguments are the list of source objects.
If the copied property name already exists, it gets overwritten.

```js
let user = { name: "John" };  // destination

let permit1 = { canView: true };
let permit2 = { canEdit: true };

Object.assign(user, permit1, permit2);

alert(user.name);  // John
alert(user.canView);  // true
alert(user.canEdit);  // true
```

### Using `Object.assign` to make a clone
```js
let user = {
	name: "John",
	age: 30
};

let copy = Object.assign( {}, user );
// copying user into a new object

alert( copy.name ); // John
```
Spread syntax can also be used to clone an object.


### Nested cloning / deep cloning / structured cloning

When objects are contained within object, usual copying and using `Object.assign` will not make a new copy of the object.

To fix that and make `user` and `clone` truly separate objects, we should use a cloning loop that examines each value of `user[key]` and, if it’s an object, then replicate its structure as well. 
That is called a “deep cloning” or “structured cloning”. There’s [structuredClone](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/structuredClone) method that implements deep cloning.

### `structureClone()`

The call `structuredClone(object)` clones the `object` with all nested properties.

```js
let user = {
	name: "John",
	age: 30,
	sizes: {
		height: 182,
		width: 50
		}
};

let clone = structuredClone(user);

alert( user.sizes == clone.sizes ); // false, different objects
// user and clone are totally unrelated now
user.sizes.width = 60;
alert(clone.sizes.width); // 50
```

The `structuredClone` method can clone most data types, such as objects, arrays, primitive values.

It also supports ***circular references***, when an object property references the object itself (directly or via a chain or references).
For instance:
```js
let user = {};
user.me = user; 
// a circular reference that references itself

let clone = structuredClone(user);
alert(clone.me === clone); // true
// the circular reference exists in the copy also
```

`structuredClone()` doesn't work when object has a function as property.
```js
structuredClone({ f: function(){} });
// error

```