
# 44 
# 2021 October - 2nd Sem - (Supplementary) - MCA21

### 1.  
**a)** Demonstrate any five list functions with the help of an example.  
**b)** Demonstrate the usage of `update()` function to update one dictionary with another dictionary.  
**c)** Develop a program to print the sum of n natural numbers.  

### 2.  
**a)** Assume that the name `a` is assigned a value `'mca@rit'`. What will be the output when we execute the following commands? Explain:  
- `a[5:]`  
- `a[:4]`  
- `a[2:-2:2]`  
- `a[3:4]`  
- `a[2:-2]`  
- `a[1:-2:]`  
- `a[-3::-2]`  
- `a[::-4]`  
- `a[-4:1:-4]`  
- `a[:-3]`  

**b)** Develop a script for filtering odd and even numbers into two separate lists from a list of numbers.  
**c)** Demonstrate the usage of `pass`, `continue`, and `break` with the help of appropriate examples.  


### 3.  
**a)** Define a Python function `isAscending(L)` that returns `True` if the input list `L` is in ascending order, otherwise returns `False`. For an empty list, it should return `True`.  
**b)** Trace the function call and find the output of the following code:  
```python
def f(x):  
    x = 2 * x  
    return x  
x = 1  
x = f(x + 1)  
```  
**c)** Explain lambda functions with examples.  
**d)** Predict the output of the following and justify your answer:  
i) What is the value of `h(6,8)` for the function below?  
```python
def h(m,n):  
    ans = 1  
    while (n > 0):  
        (ans, n) = (ans * m, n - 2)  
    return(ans)  
```  
ii) Consider the following Python function:  
```python
def mystery(ls):  
    if len(ls) < 2:  
        return (ls)  
    else:  
        return (mystery(ls[1:]) + [ls[0]])  
```  
What does `mystery([17, 12, 41, 28, 25])` return?  
iii) Given `a, b, c = True, False, False`, predict the output:  
```python
if a or b and c:  
    print("MSRIT")  
else:  
    print("VTU")  
```  

### 4.  
**a)** Write a Python function to calculate the sum and product of two arguments, and return them.  
**b)** Explain the following with sample code for each:  
i) Keyword arguments  
ii) Variable-length arguments  
iii) Default arguments  

### 5.  
**a)** How is a class created in Python? Explain the basic structure of a class with examples.  
**b)** Illustrate multilevel inheritance in Python. Also demonstrate how to pass data to the base class constructor.  

### 6.  
**a)** Create a class `Stack`. Add methods to perform different stack operations like `push`, `pop`, `is_empty`, `is_full`, and `display`.  
**b)** Demonstrate multiple inheritance with method overriding.  

### 7.  
**a)** List any 6 regular expression patterns in Python and write the meaning of each.  
**b)** Demonstrate the methods to read and write text files in Python.  
**c)** List and describe the file open modes in Python.  

### 8.  
**a)** Demonstrate the `match()` and `search()` methods with respect to regular expressions in Python.  
**b)** Explain exception handling in Python with examples.  
**c)** Write a Python program to sort the file contents in reverse order and write the sorted contents along with line numbers.  

### 9.  
**a)** Explain any five Tkinter widgets with examples.  
**b)** Write a Python program to create a database `StudentDB` with attributes `Name` and `Age`. Insert `n` records into the table and display them using suitable form controls.  

### 10.  
**a)** Discuss the architecture of CGI and the configuration changes to be incorporated in a web server to execute Python-CGI programs.  
**b)** List any four CGI environment variables and their purposes.  
**c)** Design a web page that takes a name from a text box and gender from radio buttons. Upon clicking the submit button, use a Python CGI program to display the input data on a new page.  


____


# 52 
# 2021 October - 4th Sem - (Supplementary) - MCA42

### 1.

**a)** Explain the usage of the following methods with examples:  
i) `extend()`  
ii) `pop()`  
iii) `sort()`  
iv) `split()`  
v) `join()`

**b)** Explain what `ord()` and `chr()` functions are used for. Write a function that takes a string input and converts all uppercase letters to lowercase and vice versa.  
Sample input: `I love PyTHon`  
Sample output: `i LOVE pYthON`

---

### 2.

**a)** Demonstrate how dictionaries are created and used in Python. List and describe any five methods on dictionaries.  
**b)** Develop a Python program to count the frequency of words in a string using a dictionary.  
**c)** Develop a Python program to print unique elements in a list.

---

### 3.

**a)** Write a Python function to check whether the given string is a palindrome or not. The function should take a string as an argument and return a Boolean value. Use `"MADAM"` as the default argument.  
**b)** Implement anonymous (lambda) functions for the following:  
i) Filter out only even numbers from a given list.  
ii) Reduce the given list of numbers to its sum.  
**c)** Differentiate between keyword arguments, required arguments, and variable-length arguments with suitable examples.

---

### 4.

**a)** Discuss list comprehension with an example.  
**b)** What is recursion? Find the factorial of a number using a recursive function.  
**c)** Explain the significance of:  
i) Local and global variables  
ii) Docstrings  
iii) `map()` and `reduce()` functions

---

### 5.

**a)** Define the following with respect to classes in Python. Demonstrate each:  
i) Constructor  
ii) Destructor  
iii) `getattr`  
iv) `hasattr`  
**b)** Develop a script using regular expressions to convert a date in the format `yyyy-mm-dd` to `dd-mm-yyyy`.  
**c)** Develop a script using regular expressions to match a string that contains only uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and underscores.

---

### 6.

**a)** Create a class `Rectangle`. The constructor for this class should take two numeric arguments: width and height. Add methods to compute the area and perimeter of the rectangle, as well as methods to return the height and width. Add a method `isSquare()` that returns a Boolean value if the rectangle is a square.  
**b)** List and explain 5 built-in classes in Python and their uses with suitable examples. Develop a program to demonstrate the same.

---

### 7.

**a)** Develop a Python script that prompts the user for a string and a file name, then prints all lines in the file containing the entered string.  
**b)** How do you handle exceptions? Demonstrate the `try-finally` clause.  
**c)** Write a program that creates a canvas and a button. When the user presses the button, it should draw two circles on the canvas.

---

### 8.

**a)** Discover the exception produced by the following points and develop a script to illustrate catching the exception using a `try` statement. Continue with execution after the interrupt:  
i) Division by zero  
ii) Opening a file that does not exist  
iii) Indexing a list with an illegal value  
iv) Using an improper key with a dictionary  
v) Using unindented code

**b)** Develop a Tkinter application to handle mouse and keyboard events.

---

### 9.

**a)** Explain the architecture of the Django framework.  
**b)** Design an HTML form to read information for placing an order for a T-shirt with customized text. The form should accept:

- First Name, Last Name, Address
- T-shirt Color (radio button)
- T-shirt Size (dropdown)
- Quantity

On submitting the form, display all the data in a neat format. Write the necessary Python code for the Django framework.

---

### 10.

Show the necessary steps and code to create a Movie web page and perform the following operations:  
i) Add movie details  
ii) Search movie details  
iii) Delete a movie  
iv) Modify a movie